आपण लिहिलेल्या माहितीविषयी इतर संपादक / उपयोजक सांशक आहेत. कृपया आपल्या चढवलेल्या माहितीचा संदर्भ द्या. 
संदर्भ म्हणजे काय हे जाणून घेण्यासाठी संदर्भ हा ज्ञानकोशीय लेखसुद्धा उपलब्ध आहे. विकिपीडियात संदर्भ कसा द्यावा या माहितीसाठी पुढे वाचा.
शेवटी संदर्भ कसे द्यावेत? 


आता पर्यंत दिलेल्या संदर्भा कोणत्या प्रकारचे डिटेस्ल टाकणे शक्य असेल ? पुस्तकातील नेमके अवतरण अथवा परिच्छेद, इंटरनेटवर पाहिले असल्यास नेमके कधी पाहिले ?; आयएसबीएन क्रमांक, पुस्तकात एकुण पृष्ठे किती आणि तुम्ही कोणत्या पृष्ठ क्रमांकाचा संदर्भ देत आहात ? आवृत्तीचे डिटेल्स, पुस्तकाची भाषा, संपादक, सहलेखक असे बरेच काही वाढवता येऊ शकते. या गोष्टी अत्यावश्यक नाहीत पण तुम्ही दिलेला संदर्भ इतरांना पडताळणे अधिक सुलभ आणि म्हणून तुमचा संदर्भ अधिक विश्वासार्ह होतो.

अशा पद्धतीने संदर्भाच्या पुर्व तयारीची आणखी उदाहरणे आहेत का ? : आधी चर्चा पानावरील पुर्व तयारी पहा मग संबंधीत लेखात जाऊन प्रत्यक्ष वापर पहावा. चर्चा:ब्राह्मण_समाज#तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी, चर्चा:श्रीमद्भवद्गीतारहस्य #तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी, चर्चा:गुरू ठाकूर#तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी, चर्चा:'नग्नसत्य', बलात्काराच्या वास्तवाचा अंतर्वेध #तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी, चर्चा:रामदास बंडू आठवले#तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी, चर्चा:खारफुटी#तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी, चर्चा:निबंध#तात्पुरती संदर्भयादी पहावे. 
===शब्दार्थ टीप===
असे लिहिल्यास खालील प्रमाणे दिसते.


विकिपिडीयातील माहितील संदर्भ खालील प्रकारे देता येतो:
{{dablink|WP:REF संदर्भ द्या ह्या दुव्याने तुम्हांला इथे आणले असेल, आपण जर ह्या बाबी शोधत असाल तर,विकिपीडिया:संदर्भ संसाधने दालन. संदर्भ कसे द्यायचे हे सोप्या पद्धतीने पहायचे असेल तर, विकिपीडिया:सोपे संदर्भीकरण. इतर ठिकाणी विकिपीडिया वरील लेख संदर्भ म्हणून वापरायचे असतील तर इथे पहा विकिपीडिया:विकिपीडिया संदर्भ म्हणून वापरतानासाचा:Pp-semi-indefसाचा:Pp-move-indefसाचा:Subcat guideline
मजकुराच्या प्रत्येक विधानाला वैध संदर्भ शोधणे. उदाहरणार्थ:
Ritter, Ron. The Oxford Style Manual. Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 1.
मुख्य नाम विश्वात असलेल्या म्हणजेच पानावरील प्रत्येक विधानाला संदर्भ असणे आवश्यक आहे, त्यातील आव्हान देता येऊ शकणाऱ्या, अतिशयोक्तीपूर्ण विधानांना तर संदर्भ हवेतच. हे संदर्भाविषयीचे धोरण मुख्य नाम विश्वातील सर्व लेख, याद्या, अवतरणे लेखाचे सर्व विभाग यांना लागू आहे. ह्या पानावरील सुचना आणि धोरणे यांच्यामधील गोंधळाच्या परिस्थितीमध्ये धोरणांचा विचार महत्त्वाचा मानला जावा. चित्रांना ही ती विकिवर आणताना संदर्भ देणे आवश्यक आहे, त्याचबरोबर चित्रांना प्रताधिकार मुक्ततेचीही पूर्ण माहिती देणेही बंधनकारक आहे. 
संदर्भ कसे टाकावे? : एका लेखामध्ये सर्व संदर्भ एकाच पद्धतीने द्यावेत, जर लेखात आधीच संदर्भ दिलेले असतील तर त्याच पद्धतीने पुढील संदर्भ देण्यात यावेत. जर संदर्भामध्ये संपूर्ण बदल करायचा असेल तर त्याबाबतची चर्चा चर्चा पानावर करून त्याबद्दल एकवाक्यता आल्यावरच संदर्भामध्ये बदल करण्यात यावेत. संदर्भ योग्य पद्धतीने लिहिण्यात यावेत, जेणेकरून संदर्भांविषयीची माहिती स्पष्टपणे योग्य स्वरूपात मांडली जाईल.
मजकुराच्या ओळींच्या शेवटी किंवा विधानाच्या, माहितीच्या शेवटी संदर्भ दिला जाणे अपेक्षित आहे. तो पुढीलप्रमाणे दिला जाऊ शकतो, Smith, John. ''Name of Book''. Oxford University Press, 2011, p. 1—ह्या संदर्भाने मजकुराला पाठिंबा मिळतो आणि पाठिंबा दिलेल्या स्त्रोताविषयी आवश्यक माहिती लागलीच मिळते. ज्याचा स्पष्ट उद्देश्य मजकुराची वैधता प्रस्थापित करणे हा आहे.जर,मजकूरामधील एखादा शब्द किंवा वाक्प्रचार जर वादग्रस्त आहे असे वाटत असेल तर किंवा आव्हान दिले जाईल असे असेल तर त्याला संदर्भ आवश्यक आहे. जेणेकरून ज्या स्त्रोताने मजकुराला पाठिंबा दिला जातोय तो स्त्रोत प्रस्थापित केला जाईल. 
Two styles of inlinठळक मजकूरe citation are टिचकता येणाऱ्या तळटिपा clickable footnotes and parenthetical references; the latter would involve adding in round brackets within the sentence. Both are used on Wikipedia.The sun is pretty big, but the moon is not so big. The sun is also quite hot.Notes
Many articles use short citations in footnotes, giving the author, year, and page number, such as Smith 2010, p. 1. As before, the list of footnotes is automatically generated in a "Notes" or "Footnotes" section. A full citation is then added in a "References" section. Short citations can be written manually, or by using the {{sfn}} or {{harvnb}} templates. The short and full citations may be linked so that the reader can click on the short note to highlight the full citation. See the template documentation for details and solutions to common problems. For variations with and without templates, see wikilinks to full references. For a set of realistic examples, see these.
This is how short citations look in the edit box:
The sun is pretty big,Miller 2005, p. 1. but the moon is not so big.Brown 2006, p. 2. The sun is also quite hot.Miller 2005, p. 3.== Notes =={{संदर्भयादी}}== References ==*Brown, Rebecca . "Size of the Moon," ''Scientific American'', 51.*Miller, Edward . ''The Sun''. Academic Press.
This is how they look in the article:
The sun is pretty big, but the moon is not so big. The sun is also quite hot.Notes

References
Shortened notes using titles rather than publication dates would look like this in the article:
Notes
As of September 2009, the Cite.php extension was modified to support list-defined references. These can be implemented with the |refs= parameter to the {{संदर्भयादी}} template, or by using a pair of HTML tags in place of the tag. These reduce clutter within articles, by putting all the citation details in the section at the end where the footnotes are displayed. Defined references must be used within the body; unused references will show an error message. Non-list-defined references will display as normal along with list-defined ones. As with other citation formats, list-defined references should not be added to articles that already have a stable referencing system, unless there is consensus to do so. When in doubt, use the referencing system added by the first major contributor to use a consistent style.
This is how it looks in the edit box::
The Sun is pretty big, but the Moon is not so big. The Sun is also quite hot.==References=={{संदर्भयादी|refs=Miller, Edward.''The Sun''. Academic Press, 2005, p. 23.Miller, Edward.''The Sun''. Academic Press, 2005, p. 34.Brown, Rebecca. "Size of the Moon," ''Scientific American,'' 51:46}}
This is how it looks in the article:
The Sun is pretty big, but the Moon is not so big. The Sun is also quite hot.References
In parenthetical referencing, a short citation, such as, is added in parentheses just after the point it is supporting. Several forms of parenthetical referencing are used in Wikipedia, including author-date referencing, and author-title or author-page referencing . The full citation is then added in alphabetical order, according to the authors' surnames, at the end of the article in a "References" section. The inline and full citation may be linked using a template ; as with other citation templates, these should not be added to articles without consensus.
This is how it looks in the edit box:
The Sun is pretty big, but the Moon is not so big . The Sun is also quite hot .== References ==*Brown, R . "Size of the Moon", ''Scientific American'', 51.*Miller, E . ''The Sun'', Academic Press.
This is how it looks in the article:
The Sun is pretty big, but the Moon is not so big . The Sun is also quite hot .References
When using inline citations, it is important to maintain text-source integrity. The point of an inline citation is to allow readers and other editors to check that the material is sourced; that point is lost if the citation is not clearly placed. The distance between material and its source is a matter of editorial judgment, but adding text without placing its source clearly can lead to allegations of original research, violations of the sourcing policy, and even plagiarism. Editors should exercise caution when rearranging or inserting material to ensure that text-source relationships are maintained.
The following inline citation, for example, is not helpful, because the reader does not know whether each source supports the material; each source supports part of it; or just one source supports it with the others added as further reading:
N Delia Smith is the UK's best-selling cookery writer.
Where you are using multiple sources for one sentence, consider bundling citations at the end of the sentence or paragraph with an explanation in the footnote regarding which source supports which point; see below for how to do that.
You can combine or "bundle" citations between one set of ref tags at the end of a sentence or paragraph, along with an explanation in the footnote for which source supports which part of the text. Citation bundling can be done with long or short footnotes, with or without citation templates. It has multiple benefits:
A simple example of citation bundling:
The sun is pretty big, but the moon is not so big. The sun is also quite hot.Notes
In-text attribution is the attribution inside a sentence of material to its source, in addition to an inline citation after the sentence. In-text attribution should be used with direct speech ; indirect speech ; and close paraphrasing. It can also be used when loosely summarizing a source's position in your own words. It avoids inadvertent plagiarism, and helps the reader see where a position is coming from. An inline citation should follow the attribution, usually at the end of the sentence or paragraph in question.
For example:
Y John Rawls argues that, to reach fair decisions, parties must consider matters as if behind a veil of ignorance.
When using in-text attribution, make sure it doesn't lead to an inadvertent neutrality violation. For example, the following implies parity between the sources, without making clear that the position of Dawkins is the majority view:
N Richard Dawkins argues that human beings evolved through natural selection, but John Smith writes that we arrived here in pods from Mars.
Neutrality issues apart, there are other ways in-text attribution can mislead. The sentence below suggests The New York Times has alone made this important discovery:
N According to The New York Times, the sun will set in the west this evening.
Simple facts such as this can have inline citations to reliable sources as an aid to the reader, but normally the text itself is best left as a plain statement without in-text attribution:
YBy mass, oxygen is the third most abundant element in the universe after hydrogen and helium.
If an article is unreferenced you can tag it with the template {{Unreferenced}}, so long as it is not nonsensical or a biography of a living person, in which case request admin assistance.

Don't cite a source unless you've seen it for yourself. Where you want to cite John Smith, but you've only read Paul Jones who cites Smith, write it like this :
If you first learned of John Smith's book because it was cited in Paul Jones' encyclopedia, but you then actually obtained and read John Smith's book, it is not necessary to give "credit" to any sources, search engines, library catalogs, etc., that led you to Smith's book. You may cite Smith's book directly and solely in that instance.
For a source available in hardcopy, microform, and/or online, omit, in most cases, which one you read. While it is useful to cite author, title, edition, and similar information, it generally is not important to cite a database such as ProQuest, EbscoHost, or JStor or to link to such a database requiring a subscription or a third party's login. The basic bibliographic information you provide should be enough to search for the source in any of these databases that have the source. Don't add a URL that has a part of a password embedded in the URL. However, you may provide the DOI, ISBN, or another uniform identifier, if available. If the publisher offers a link to the source or its abstract that does not require a payment or a third party's login for access, you may provide the URL for that link. And if the source exists only online, give the link even if access is restricted.
Because this is the English Wikipedia, English-language sources should be used in preference to non-English language sources of equal caliber and content, though the latter are allowed where appropriate. When quoting a source in a different language, please provide both the original-language quotation and an English translation, in the text, in a footnote, or on the talk page as appropriate, so long as the quotation is not so lengthy that it would violate copyright. 
A convenience link is a link to a copy of your source on a webpage provided by someone other than the original publisher or author. For example, a copy of a newspaper article no longer available on the newspaper's website may be hosted elsewhere. When offering convenience links, it is important to be reasonably certain that the convenience copy is a true copy of the original, without any changes or inappropriate commentary, and that it does not infringe the original publisher's copyright. Accuracy can be assumed when the hosting website appears reliable. Where several sites host a copy of the material, the site selected as the convenience link should be the one whose general content appears most in line with Wikipedia:Neutral point of view and Wikipedia:Verifiability.
Multimedia material should be referenced just like article text. Citations for a media file should appear on its file page. Image captions should be referenced as appropriate just like any other part of the article. If an infobox or table contains text that needs citing, but the box or table cannot incorporate an inline citation, the citation should appear in a caption or other text that discusses the material. A citation is not needed for descriptions such as alt text that are verifiable directly from the image itself. Material that identifies a source " for File:Rembrandt-Belsazar.jpg) is considered attribution and normally does not need further citation.
Scrolling lists, or lists of citations appearing within a scroll box, should never be used because of issues with readability, accessibility, printing, and site mirroring. Additionally, it cannot be guaranteed that such lists will display properly in all web browsers. See this July 2007 discussion for more detail.
A general reference is a citation to a reliable source that supports content, but is not displayed as an inline citation. General references are usually listed at the end of the article in a References section. They may be found in underdeveloped articles, especially when all article content is supported by a single source. The disadvantage of using general references is that text-source integrity is lost, unless the article is very short. The sourcing policy, Verifiability, requires inline citations for all quotations, and for anything challenged or likely to be challenged.
A general reference looks like this in the edit box:
The Sun is pretty big, but the Moon is not so big. The Sun is also quite hot.== References ==*Brown, R . "Size of the Moon", ''Scientific American'', 51.*Miller, E . ''The Sun'', Academic Press.
This is how it looks in the article:
The Sun is pretty big, but the Moon is not so big. The Sun is also quite hot.References
Embedded links to external websites should not be used as a form of inline citation, because they are highly susceptible to linkrot. Wikipedia allowed this in its early years—for example by adding a link after a sentence, like this, which looks like this. This is no longer recommended. Raw links are not recommended in lieu of properly written out citations, even if placed between ref tags, like this .
Embedded links should never be used to place external links in the body of an article, like this: "Apple, Inc. announced their latest product..."
"Further reading" or "External links" are used as section headings for books, articles, and websites related to the topic that have not been used as sources.


There are a number of citation styles. See here for some examples. They all include the same information, but vary in punctuation and the order of the author's name, publication date, title, and page numbers. 
All of the citations within each Wikipedia article should follow a consistent style. The citation style chosen for one article does not have to match the citation style chosen for another article, but within each article, the style used should be consistent. If the article you are editing is already using a particular citation style, you should follow that style. 
Do not change the citation style used in an article merely for personal preference or cosmetic reasons. If you think the existing citation system is inappropriate for the specific needs of the article, gain consensus for a change on the talk page before changing it. As with issues of spelling differences, if there is disagreement about which style is best, defer to the style used by the first major contributor. If you are the first major contributor to an article, you may choose whichever style you think best for the article.
Citations for books typically include:
Citations for journal articles typically incतिरपी मुद्राक्षरेlude:
Citations for newspaper articles typically include:
Citations for World Wide Web pages typically include:
When citing lengthy sources, you should identify which part of a source is being cited. For example, in the case of a book, specify the page number. Page numbers are not required for a reference to the book as a whole. When you specify a page number, it is helpful to specify the version of the source because the layout, pagination, length, etc. can change between editions.
A citation ideally includes a link or ID number to help editors locate the source. If you have a URL link, you can add it to the title part of the citation, so that when you add the citation to Wikipedia the URL becomes hidden and the title becomes clickable. To do this, enclose the URL and the title in square brackets—the URL first, then a space, then the title. For example:
Carr A, Ory D . ''PLoS Medicine'', 3:e496.
For web-only sources with no publication date you should include a "Retrieved" date instead, in case the webpage changes in the future. For example: Retrieved 2008-07-15.
You can also add an ID number to the end of a citation. The ID number might be an ISBN for a book, a DOI for an article, or any of several ID numbers that are specific to particular article databases, such as a PMID number for articles on PubMed. It may be possible to format these so that they are automatically activated and become clickable when added to Wikipedia, for example by typing ISBN following by a space followed by the ID number.
If your source is not available online, it should be available in reputable libraries, archives, or collections. If a citation without an external link is challenged as unavailable, any of the following is sufficient to show the material to be reasonably available : providing an ISBN or OCLC number; linking to an established Wikipedia article about the source ; or directly quoting the material on the talk page, briefly and in context.

Citation templates are used to format citations in a consistent way. The use of citation templates is neither encouraged nor discouraged. Templates may be used or removed at the discretion of individual editors, subject to agreement with other editors on the article. Because templates can be contentious, editors should not change an article with a distinctive citation format to another without gaining consensus. Where no agreement can be reached, defer to the style used by the first major contributor.
Citations may be accompanied by metadata, though it is not mandatory. Most citation templates on Wikipedia use the COinS microformat. Metadata such as this allow browser plugins and other automated software to make citation data accessible to the user, for instance by providing links to their library's online copies of the cited works. In articles that format citations manually, metadata may be added manually in a span, according to the COinS specification; or the templates Template:Citation metadata or Template:COinS can be used.
You can insert a link beside each citation in Wikipedia, allowing you to export the citation to a reference manager, such as EndNote. Just copy this code:
to the end of Special:MyPage/monobook.js. Then, save the page and bypass your browser's cache.
To help prevent dead links, persistent identifiers are available for some sources. Some journal articles have a digital object identifier ; some online newspapers and blogs, and also Wikipedia, have permalinks that are stable. When permanent links aren't available, consider archiving the referenced document when writing the article; on-demand web archiving services such as WebCite are fairly easy to use . Dead links should be repaired or replaced if possible.
Other

