

Notes:
This is a list of cricketers who have captained the Sri Lankan cricket team for at least one One Day International. The table of results is complete to the पहिला एकदिवसीय सामना against India on 19 August 2006. Sri Lanka's greatest success was when they won the 1996 cricket World Cup under the captaincy of अर्जुन रणतुंगा.
The ICC Trophy is the leading one-day tournament from non-Test teams, and Sri Lanka participated in the tournament before they gained Test status. This is a list of the men who captained Sri Lanka in the ICC Trophy.
In October and November 1982 a group of Sri Lankan cricketers went on a private tour of apartheid South Africa. It was the first time a tour comprising all non-white cricketers had toured white South Africa . They played under the banner "Arosa Sri Lanka", the "Arosa" bit coming from their promoters. All players were banned from cricket for life as a result.
The Arosa Sri Lanka team was captained by Bandula Warnapura. They were soundly beaten in the two rebel Tests and four rebel ODIs that they played against the full South African cricket team.
This is a list of cricketers who have captained the Sri Lankan Under-19 cricket team for at least one under-19 Test match. The table of results is complete to the second "Test" against Pakistan in 2004/5. Where a player has a dagger next to a Test match series in which he captained at least one Test, that denotes that player was captain for a minor proportion in a series. The very nature of Under-19 cricket means that in practice no youth captains the side for more than one year. 
This is a list of cricketers who have captained the Sri Lankan Under-19 cricket team for at least one Under-19 One Day International. The table of results is complete to the end of the 2005/6 Afro-Asia Cup. Sri Lanka's best result in the Under-19 World Cup was as runners-up in 1999/2000 under the captaincy of Malintha Gajanayake.
This is a list of cricketers who have captained the Sri Lankan women's cricket team for at least one women's Test match. As of 2005 Sri Lanka have played only one women's Test.
This is a list of cricketers who have captained the Sri Lankan women's cricket team for at least one women's one-day international. The table of results is complete to the women's ODI against South Africa in the World Cup in 2004/5. Sri Lanka have never reached the semi-final stage in women's World Cups. 
ऑस्ट्रेलिया | बांगलादेश | इंग्लंड | भारत | न्यू झीलँड | पाकिस्तान | दक्षिण आफ्रिका | श्रीलंका | वेस्ट ईंडीझ | झिम्बाब्वे
