

At the end of each FIFA World Cup final tournament, several awards are attributed to the players and teams which have distinguished from the rest, in different aspects of the game. 
There are currently six awards: 
An All-Star Team comprising of the best players of the tournament, is also announced for each tournament since १९९०.
प्रत्येक फिफा विश्वचषक स्पर्धेत सर्वाधिक गोल करणाऱ्या खेळाडूस सोनेरी बूट पुरस्कार दिला जातो. जर दोन किंवा अधिक असे खेळाडू असतील तर इतर खेळाडूंना केलेले सहाय्य हे निर्णायक ठरते. जर यातूनही एक खेळाडू निवडता नाही आला तर उरलेल्यांपैकी कमीतकमी वेळ स्पर्धेत खेळलेल्या खेळाडूस हा पुरस्कार दिला जातो.
The award was introduced at the १९३० World Cup for the first time. The २००६ World Cup in Germany was the first time that the Silver and Bronze shoe awards were added to reward the second and third top scorers in the tournament. If there is more than one player with the same amount of goals, the tie-breaker goes to the player who has contributed the most number of assists. If there is still more than one player, the tie-breaker goes to the player who has played the least amount of minutes.
 Oleg Salenko
साचा:UnreferencedsectionThe Golden Ball award is presented to the most valuable player at each FIFA World Cup finals, with a shortlist drawn up by the FIFA technical committee and the winner voted for by representatives of the media. Those who finish as runners-up in media voting receive the adidas Silver Ball and Bronze Ball awards as the २nd and ३rd most outstanding players in the tournament respectively. 
This Award was first awarded in १९८२.
साचा:UnreferencedsectionThe Yashin Award for the Best Goalkeeper is named in honor of the late goalkeeper Lev Yashin . The FIFA Technical Study Group recognizes the top goalkeeper of the tournament based on the player’s performance throughout the final competition. Although goalkeepers have this specific award for their position, they are still eligible for the Golden Ball as well, as when Oliver Kahn was awarded in २००२. Although the Yashin was first awarded in १९९४, every All-Star Team in World Cups prior to १९९८ included only one goalkeeper:
The Yashin Award was first awarded in १९९४
The FIFA Fair Play Trophy is given to the team with the best record of fair play during the World Cup final tournament. Only teams that qualified for the second round are considered. The winners of this award earn the FIFA Fair Play Trophy, a diploma, a fair play medal for each player and official, and $५०,००० worth of football equipment to be used for youth development.
The FIFA Award for the Most Entertaining Team is a fairly new accolade for the FIFA World Cup. It is a subjectively awarded prize for the team which has done the most to entertain the public with a positive approach to the game. The award is always organized through public participation in a poll. Recent awards have been determined by an Internet vote which may not fairly and accurately represent fan demographics.
साचा:UnreferencedsectionThe Best Young Player award was awarded for the first time at the २००६ FIFA World Cup in Germany and given to Germany's Lukas Podolski. The award is given to the best player in the tournament who is at most २१ years old. For the २००६ FIFA World Cup this means that the player had to have been born on or after १ January, इ.स. १९८५. The election took place on FIFA's official World Cup website with the help of The FIFA Technical Study Group.
The Best Young Player Award was first awarded in २००६
साचा:UnreferencedsectionThe All-Star Team, currently named after its current sponsor MasterCard All-Star Team, is a team of the best २३ players, chosen by FIFA's technical study group, from the World Cup Finals. The number of players was expanded from ११ to १६ at the १९९८ finals, and then to the current २३.Before १९९८, journalists and experts chose a "Dream Team" with outstanding players from each playing position. The teams were chosen mostly by European and South American journalists.
 Enrique Ballesteros 
 José Nasazzi Milutin Ivković 
 Luis Monti Alvaro Gestido José Andrade 
 Pedro Cea Héctor Castro Héctor Scarone Guillermo Stabile Bert Patenaude 
 Ricardo Zamora 
 Jacinto Quincoces Eraldo Monzeglio 
 Luis Monti Attilio Ferraris Leonardo Cilaurren 
 Giuseppe Meazza Raimundo Orsi Enrique Guaita Matthias Sindelar Oldrich Nejedly 
 Frantisek Planicka 
 Pietro Rava Alfredo Foni Domingos da Guia 
 Michele Andreolo Ugo Locatelli 
 Silvio Piola Gino Colaussi György Sárosi Gyula Zsengellér Leônidas 
 Roque Máspoli 
 Erik Nilsson José Parra Schubert Gambetta 
 Obdulio Varela Walter Bahr 
 Ghiggia Zizinho Ademir Jair Schiaffino 
 Gyula Grosics 
 Ernst Ocwirk József Bozsik José Santamaría 
 Fritz Walter Bauer 
 Helmut Rahn Nándor Hidegkuti Ferenc Puskás Sándor Kocsis Zoltan Czibor 
 Lev Yashin 
 Djalma Santos Bellini Nílton Santos 
 Danny Blanchflower Didi 
 Pelé Garrincha Just Fontaine Raymond Kopa Gunnar Gren 
 Antonio Carbajal 
 Djalma Santos Cesare Maldini Valeriy Voronin Karl-Heinz Schnellinger 
 Zagallo Zito Josef Masopust 
 Vavá Garrincha Leonel Sanchez 
 Gordon Banks 
 George Cohen Bobby Moore Valeriy Voronin Silvio Marzolini 
 Franz Beckenbauer Coluna Bobby Charlton 
 Florian Albert Uwe Seeler Eusébio 
 Ladislao Mazurkiewicz 
 Carlos Alberto Piazza Franz Beckenbauer Giacinto Facchetti 
 Gérson Gianni Rivera Bobby Charlton 
 Pelé Gerd Müller Jairzinho 
 Jan Tomaszewski 
 Berti Vogts Wim Suurbier Franz Beckenbauer Marinho Chagas 
 Wolfgang Overath Kazimierz Deyna Johan Neeskens 
 Rob Rensenbrink Johan Cruijff Grzegorz Lato 
 Ubaldo Fillol 
 Berti Vogts Ruud Krol Daniel Passarella Alberto Tarantini 
 Dirceu Franco Causio Rob Rensenbrink 
 Teofilo Cubillas Daniel Bertoni Mario Kempes 
 Dino Zoff 
 Claudio Gentile Luizinho Fulvio Collovati Júnior 
 Zbigniew Boniek Falcão Michel Platini Zico 
 Paolo Rossi Karl-Heinz Rummenigge 
 Harald Schumacher 
 Josimar Manuel Amoros Maxime Bossis 
 Jan Ceulemans Felix Magath Michel Platini Diego Maradona 
 Preben Elkjær Larsen Emilio Butragueño Gary Lineker 
 Sergio Goycoechea 
 Andreas Brehme Paolo Maldini Franco Baresi 
 Diego Maradona Lothar Matthäus Roberto Donadoni Paul Gascoigne 
 Salvatore Schillaci Roger Milla Tomas Skuhravy 
 Michel Preud'homme 
 Jorginho Márcio Santos Paolo Maldini 
 Dunga Krasimir Balakov Gheorghe Hagi Tomas Brolin 
 Romário Hristo Stoichkov Roberto Baggio 
 Fabien Barthez José Luis Chilavert
 Roberto Carlos Marcel Desailly Lilian Thuram Frank de Boer Carlos Gamarra
 Dunga Rivaldo Michael Laudrup Zinedine Zidane Edgar Davids
 Ronaldo Davor Šuker Brian Laudrup Dennis Bergkamp
 Oliver Kahn Rüştü Reçber
 Roberto Carlos Sol Campbell Fernando Hierro Hong Myung-Bo Alpay Özalan
 Rivaldo Ronaldinho Michael Ballack Claudio Reyna Yoo Sang-Chul
 Ronaldo Miroslav Klose El Hadji Diouf Hasan Şaş 
 Gianluigi Buffon Jens Lehmann Ricardo
 Roberto Ayala John Terry Lilian Thuram Philipp Lahm Fabio Cannavaro Gianluca Zambrotta Ricardo Carvalho
 Zé Roberto Patrick Vieira Zinedine Zidane Michael Ballack Andrea Pirlo Gennaro Gattuso Luís Figo Cristiano Ronaldo
 Hernán Crespo  Thierry Henry Miroslav Klose Francesco Totti Luca Toni
Only one player has been named in three separate All-Star teams: Franz Beckenbauer of West Germany, who was included in the १९६६, १९७०, and १९७४ editions of the All-Star Team. Eighteen others have been named to two separate All-Star teams: Luis Monti ; Garrincha, Valeriy Voronin and Djalma Santos ; Pelé ; Bobby Charlton; Berti Vogts ; Michel Platini ; Diego Maradona ; Paolo Maldini ; Dunga ; Roberto Carlos, Rivaldo, and Ronaldo ; Lilian Thuram and Zinedine Zidane ; Michael Ballack and Miroslav Klose .

