

साचा:Unreferencedसाचा:Original researchसाचा:Other uses
विजय हे एक सर्वनाम तसेच नाम आहे.विजयी असे त्याचे विशेषण आहे.Victory is a term, originally in applied to warfare, given to success achieved in personal combat, after military operations in general or, by extension, in any competition. Success in a military campaign is considered a strategic victory, while the success in a military engagement is a tactical victory.
In terms of human emotion, victory is accompanied with strong feelings of elation, and in human behaviour is often accompanied with movements and poses paralleling threat display preceding the combat, associated with the excess endorphin built up preceding and during combat.Victory dances and victory cries similarly parallel war dances and war cries performed before the outbreak of physical violence.Examples of victory behaviour reported in Roman antiquity, where the term originates, are the victory songs of the Batavi mercenaries serving under Gaius Julius Civilis after the victory over Quintus Petillius Cerialis in the Batavian rebellion of 69, and also the "abominable song" to Wodan, sung by the Langobards at their victory celebration in 579. The sacrificial animal was a goat, around whose head the Langobard danced in a circle while singing their victory hymn .In the Roman Republic, victories were celebrated by triumph ceremonies and monuments such as victory columns . A trophy is a token of victory taken from the defeated party, such as the enemy's weapons, or body parts .
In mythology, victory is often deified, as in Greek Nike or Roman Victoria. Archetypical victories of good over evil, or of light over dark etc. are a recurring theme in mythology and fairy tales. The victorious agent is a hero, often portrayed as engaging in hand-to-hand combat with a monster . Sol invictus of Roman mythology became an epithet of Christ in Christian mythology. The resurrection of Christ is presented as a victory over Death and Sin by Paul of Tarsus .
Latinate victory from the 14th century replaces Old English sige, a frequent element in Germanic names, cognate to Celtic sego- and Sanskrit sahas.
