"In the name of the Belgian Government and in our own name we would like to express our deepest sympathy to the Polish Government, the Polish people and the families of the victims”.
We accompany the great Polish people in this hour of tragedy. Feel the affection of the people of Colombia and I invite my fellow colombians to observe a minute of silence to express the affection for the people of Poland, solidarity in this day of mourning.
We accompany with all our hearts the brotherly people of Poland" 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Lene Espersen has also condolences to his Polish colleague. "President Kaczynski will be remembered as a significant and respected politician, both as a participant in the Polish struggle for freedom against communism and served as president of the Polish people", she said.
Also the Danish royal couple has responded to the disaster. Queen Margrethe and Prince Henrik have sent their condolences to the Polish parliament.
Taoiseach Brian Cowen: "On my own behalf, and on behalf of my Government, I wish to extend our sincere condolences to the Polish Government and the people of Poland for their huge loss arising from this terrible tragedy. Our thoughts and prayers are with them at very sad and difficult time" 
President Giorgio Napolitano said: "I wish to express on the behalf of myself and the Italian people our most sincere sympathies to the bereaved."
Prime Minister Valdis Dombrovskis and Foreign Minister Maris Riekstins on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Latvia have sent condolence letters.
King Harald V of Norway sent a telegram to the Polish National Assembly, which stated: "I was shocked and saddened by the news of the terrible plane-accident today that caused the death of your president HE Lech Kaczynski, his wife, and so many persons from Poland’s public life and other citizens of Poland. On behalf of myself and the Norwegian people, I wish to convey to you and to the people of Poland my heartfelt sympathy and deepest condolences."
The Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that it "expresses its deep regret about the aviation disaster in which President Lech Kaczynski lost his life, together with other Polish public figures. In this tragic moment, we convey our condolences and solidarity with the bereaved families and the entire Polish people."
Jerzy Buzek of Poland, the President of the European Parliament, expressed his condolences.
European Commission
José Manuel Barroso of Portugal, the President of the European Commission said: "I express my deep condolences to Poland for the passing away of President Kaczyński, his wife and all those with them under such tragic circumstances on their way to mark the 70th anniversary commemoration of the Katyn massacres. I have worked very closely with President Kaczyński, in a spirit of loyalty, and I respected in him a very determined Polish patriot who at the same time was very committed to our European Union and to the values of freedom and solidarity. The European Commission joins me in this moment in the expression of sympathy and tribute."
The High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton of the United Kingdom expressed her condolences to Polish Foreign Minister Radosław Sikorski. She told Sikorski: "I would like to send my heartfelt condolences to the people of Poland and express our solidarity with you at this very difficult and sad time. In particular, I want to express my sympathies to the family and friends of those who died."
European Council
Herman Van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, said: "I am deeply upset by the news of the death of President Lech Kaczyński, his spouse and several senior Polish officials and representatives in a plane accident this morning. I knew President Kaczyński personally from several meetings in the European Council and in Warsaw and am saddened by his death. Poland lost a great patriot and head of state. His political commitment was to serve the Polish people." He added: "I want to express my heartfelt condolences to the families of the president and of the other victims, to Prime Minister Tusk and to the Polish people. I wish to convey to them the support of the European Union in these extremely painful circumstances."
European Central Bank
Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank expressed his "sincerest condolences to the families of all the victims of this terrible accident" on behalf of the ECB’s General Council, the ECB’s Executive Board and in his personal capacity. He said his thoughts are with the people of Poland. He added: "The General Council of the ECB deeply regrets the loss of its highly esteemed member, Mr Sławomir Skrzypek, President of Narodowy Bank Polski. We will remember Sławomir as a good friend and a dedicated professional, who made valuable contributions to the work of the General Council.”
