

साचा:Pp-move-indef
आले हे महत्वाचे मसाल्याचे पीक् असुन् त्यचि लागवड् मे महिन्याच्या पहिल्या पन्धर् वाड्यात् करतात.हे पीक् उश्न हवामानात् चांगले येते.
आले ही एक वनस्पती आहे. तिचे मूळ हे सुगंधी असल्याने मसाल्याचा पदार्थ म्हणून वापरले जाते.
आले हे चवीसाठी खाल्ले जाते वा औषध किंवा मसाला म्हणून स्वयंपाकात वापरले जाते. हळदीप्रमाणेच 'जमिनीखालील मुळी' म्हणून याला ओळखले जाते. आल्यास लागवडीची दीर्घकालीन परंपरा आहे.आशिया खंडात उत्पन्न होऊन भारतात, तसेच दक्षिण आशिया, पश्चिम आफ्रिका व कॅरिबियन बेटे येथे त्याची लागवड केली जाते. काही वस्तूंच्या नावापासून वेगळेपणा जपण्यासाठी आल्यास काही ठिकाणी 'आल्याचे मूळ' असेही म्हणतात.
The characteristic odor and flavor of ginger root is caused by a mixture of zingerone, shogaols and gingerols, volatile oils that compose about one to three percent of the weight of fresh ginger. In laboratory animals, the gingerols increase the motility of the gastrointestinal tract and have analgesic, sedative, antipyretic and antibacterial properties.
Ginger contains up to three percent of a fragrant essential oil whose main constituents are sesquiterpenoids, with -zingiberene as the main component. Smaller amounts of other sesquiterpenoids and a small monoterpenoid fraction have also been identified.
The pungent taste of ginger is due to nonvolatile phenylpropanoid-derived compounds, particularly gingerols and shogaols, which form from gingerols when ginger is dried or cooked. Zingerone is also produced from gingerols during this process; this compound is less pungent and has a spicy-sweet aroma. Ginger is also a minor chemical irritant, and because of this was used as a horse suppository by pre-World War I mounted regiments for feaguing.
Ginger has a sialagogue action, stimulating the production of saliva, which makes swallowing easier.
साचा:Nutritionalvalue
Young ginger rhizomes are juicy and fleshy with a very mild taste. They are often pickled in vinegar or sherry as a snack or just cooked as an ingredient in many dishes. They can also be stewed in boiling water to make ginger tea, to which honey is often added as a sweetener; sliced orange or lemon fruit may also be added. Mature ginger roots are fibrous and nearly dry. The juice from old ginger roots is often used as a spice in Indian recipes and Chinese cuisine to flavor dishes such as seafood or mutton and vegetarian recipes. Powdered dry ginger root is typically used to spice gingerbread and other recipes. Fresh ginger can be substituted for ground ginger at a ratio of 6 parts fresh for 1 part ground, although the flavors of fresh and dried ginger are not exactly interchangeable. 
Ginger is also made into candy, is used as a flavoring for cookies, crackers and cake, and is the main flavor in ginger ale—a sweet, carbonated, non-alcoholic beverage, as well as the similar, but spicier ginger beer which is popular in the Caribbean.
Fresh ginger should be peeled before being eaten . For storage, the ginger should be wrapped tightly in a towel and placed in a plastic bag, and can be kept for about three weeks in a refrigerator and up to three months in a freezer.
भारतात यास आले/अद्रक म्हणतात. ताजे आले हा अनेक खाद्यपदार्थाचा घटक आहे. थंडीमध्ये चहाची व वेग वेगळ्या पदार्थ चव वाढविण्यासाठी त्यात आले टाकतात. काही ठिकाणी आले हे गर्भार व बाळंतीण बाईस चवीसाठी देतात. आल्यापासून वड्यांच्या स्वरूपात असलेला आलेपाक बनतो.


साचा:Grocers
आले हे विक्शनरीवर शोधा.

साचा:Wikispecies
‎
