

तमिळ दिनदर्शिका
The Tamil calendar is used in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry in India, and by the Tamil population in Malaysia, Singapore and श्रीलंका. It is used today for cultural, religious and agricultural events, with the Gregorian calendar having largely supplanted it for official use both within and outside India. The Tamil calendar is based on the classical Hindu solar calendar also used in Assam, Bengal, केरळ, Manipur, Nepal, Orissa, Rajasthan and the Punjab.
There are several festivals based on the Tamil Hindu calendar. The Tamil New Year follows the nirayanam vernal equinox and generally falls on April 13 or 14th of the Gregorian year. April 13 or 14th marks the first day of the traditional Tamil calendar and this remains a public holiday in both Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka. Tropical vernal equinox fall around 22 March, and adding 23 degrees of trepidation or oscillation to it, we get the Hindu sidereal or Nirayana Mesha Sankranti . Hence, the Tamil calendar begins on the same date in April which is observed by most traditional calendars of the rest of India - Assam, Bengal, केरळ, Orissa, Manipur, Nepal, Punjab etc. This also coincides with the traditional new year in Burma, Cambodia, Laos, Sri Lanka and Thailand. The 60-year cycle is also very ancient and is observed by most traditional calendars of India and China, and is related to 5 revolutions of Jupiter according to popular belief, or to 60-year orbit of Nakshatras as mentioned in Surya Siddhanta.
The traditional Tamil year starts on April 14, 2010, Kaliyuga 5112. Vikrama and Shalivahana Saka eras are also used. There are several references in early Tamil literature to the April new year. Nakkirar, the author of the Nedunalvaadai writes in the 3rd century that the Sun travels from Mesha/Chitterai through 11 successive Raasis or signs of the zodiac. Koodaloor Kizhaar in the 3rd century refers to Mesha Raasi/Chitterai as the commencement of the year in the Puranaanooru. The 8th century Silappadikaaram mentions the 12 Raasis or zodiac signs starting with Mesha/Chitterai. The Manimekalai alludes to the Hindu solar calendar as we know it today..
The days of the Tamil Calendar relate to the celestial bodies in the solar system: Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, in that order. The week starts with Sunday.
This list compiles the days of the week in the Tamil calendar:
For Tamils the each day begins at the sun set and that is why it is being said on the evening of Thursday it was told it is the meeting point of Thursday and Friday which is why loans are to be eschewed during this period onwards till Friday wanes off. In this regard Parthimar Kalingar has done extensive research to prove the beginning of a Tamil day
The number of days in a month varies between 29 and 32. 
The following list compiles the months of the Tamil Calendar. 
Note: The Sanskrit months above would start one month ahead of Tamil months since the Tamil calendar is a solar calendar while the Sanskrit calendar is a lunisolar calendar
The Tamil year, in keeping with the old Indic calendar, is divided into six seasons, each of which lasts two months:
The 60-year cycle of the Tamil calendar is common to North and South Indian traditional calendars, with the same name and sequence of years. Its earliest reference is to be found in Surya Siddhanta, which Varahamihirar believed to be the most accurate of the then current theories of astronomy. However, in the Surya Siddhantic list, the first year was Vijaya and not Prabhava as currently used. This 60-year cycle is also used in the Chinese calendar.
After the completion of sixty years, the calendar starts anew with the first year. This corresponds to the Hindu "century." The Vakya or Tirukannitha Panchangam outlines this sequence.
The following list presents the current 60-year cycle of the Tamil calendar:
The months of the Tamil Calendar have great significance and are deeply rooted in the faith of the Tamil Hindus. Some months are considered very auspicious while a few are considered inauspicious as well.
Some of the celebrations for each month are listed below. Dates in parentheses are not exact and usually vary by a day or two. Underneath the months of the Hindu calendar are their Gregorian counterparts.
Also Annaabishekam for Lord Shiva is very famous in this month. The most famous Hindu festival "Deepavali" is celebrated in this month. The Fridays of this month - Aipassi velli - are dedicated to religious observance. 
Each Monday of this month is dedicated to the worship of Lord Murugan.Every Monday is called "Somavaaram" when 108 or 1008 sangabhishekam are offered to Lord Shiva and Lord Muruga.
The Tamil Calendar is so important to the life of Tamil-speaking people that most of the Festivals of Tamil Nadu are based on it. Some of Festivals include Tamil New Year or Puthandu in mid-April, Thai Pongal, Deepavali, Panguni Uthiram, Thirukaarthigai, Aadiperukku, Navaratri etc.
साचा:Wiktionarypar
साचा:Calendars
