द अमेझिंग रेस १५ ही दूरचित्रवाणी मालिका द अमेझिंग रेस या मालिकेचे पंधरावे पर्व आहे. यात दोन व्यक्तींच्या बारा संघानी भाग घेतला. प्रत्येक संघातील व्यक्ती एकमेकांच्या नात्यातील होत्या
हे पर्व सप्टेंबर २७, इ.स. २००९ रोजी सुरू झाले. ही मालिका अमेरिकेत सी.बी.एस. वाहिनीवर दर रविवारी रात्री ८ वाजता दाखवली जाते. या पर्वाचा शेवट डिसेंबर ६, २००९ रोजी होईल.
संघ आणि निकाल. खालील संघातील व्यक्तींची नाती शर्यत सुरू होण्यावेळच्यी होती.
१ - Eric & Lisa were eliminated at the Starting Line as per the provisions of the opening task .२ - Mika & Canaan initially arrived 10th, but had lost one of the tourists that was required to accompany them to the Pit Stop. They had to find their missing tourist before checking in. This did not affect their placement.३ - Maria & Tiffany were issued a 2-hour penalty for losing two of their tourists on the way to the Pit Stop; however, since they arrived last and it was a non-elimination leg, they were allowed to check in immediately and the penalty time was assessed at the start of the following leg.४ - Zev & Justin initially arrived 1st, but discovered after being checked in at the mat that they were missing Zev's passport. They were required to search for the passport and bring it back to the Pit Stop or else they would face elimination. Teams that had not yet arrived at the Pit Stop were allowed to check in while they were searching. Unsuccessful in their search, they returned after the last team – Maria & Tiffany – checked in, and thus Zev & Justin were eliminated.५ - Mika & Canaan proceeded to the Pit Stop having failed to properly complete the Leap of Faith task. Already in last place, they were eliminated.६ - Brian & Ericka initially arrived 5th, but were issued a 30-minute penalty because they did not travel by bicycle to the Detour as instructed in their clue. This did not affect their placement.७ - Maria & Tiffany failed to complete either Detour task and were issued a 24-hour penalty. Already in last place, Phil came out to their location and eliminated them.८ - Flight Time & Big Easy were issued a 4-hour penalty because Big Easy failed to complete the Roadblock and offered to take the penalty for his team. By the time they reached their next Route Marker, all other teams had already checked in at the mat and Flight Time & Big Easy's clue instructed them to go directly to the Pit Stop where they were eliminated.


