

साचा:Unreferenced
साचा:Close RelationshipsA widow is a woman whose spouse has died. A man whose spouse has died is a widower. The state of having lost one's spouse to death is termed widowhood or viduity. The adjective is widowed.
The economic position of widows has been an important social issue in many societies. In societies in which the husband was typically the sole provider, his death could plunge his family into poverty. This was aggravated by women's longer life spans, and that men generally marry women younger than themselves. Many charities existed to help widows and orphans in need.
However, even in some patriarchal societies, widows could maintain economic independence. A widow could carry on her late husband's business and consequently be accorded certain rights, such as the right to enter guilds. More recently, widows of elected officials have been among the first women elected to office in many countries .
Many societies that prohibited divorce nevertheless allowed widows to re-marry, thus widowhood carried implications for sexual freedom as well; although some wills contained dum casta provisions, in societies preventing divorce, widowhood permitted women to remarry and have a greater range of sexual experiences.
In some other cultures, widows are treated differently. For instance, in India there is often an elaborate ceremony during the funeral of a widow's husband, including smashing the bangles, removing the bindi as well as any colorful attire, and requiring the woman to wear white clothes, the colour of mourning. Earlier it was compulsory to wear all white after the husband was dead, and even Widow burning was practised sometimes. However in modern-day culture this has gradually given way to wearing colored clothing. Sati practice has been banned in India for more than a century. The ban began under British rule of India owing to the persistence of social reformer RajaRam Mohan Roy. 
In other cultures, widows are required to remarry within the family of their late husband; see widow inheritance. This started as a custom to ensure that no widow could be kicked out of her home and face a life without financial provision, but it can also be used to keep money within the family. In addition, it is an important factor in the transmission of HIV within certain communities, e.g. the Luo, and is being challenged on human rights grounds.
भारतात, विधवा पुनर्विवाहाला कायदेशीर मान्यता आहे. तरीही पुराणमतवादी समाजांत विधवांना कमनशिबी समजले जाते. challenges of child support, finance, social stigma, security and remarriage. Family of widowers however, sympathize and console him with remarriage, many a times, to an unmarried woman. अनेकदा विधवेचे नातेवाईक तिला आधार often provide support to children making it easier for him to move on. Similar is the case with divorced men seeking unmarried women from poorer backgrounds. Such practices question the law for allowing a divorced man or widower, to remarry an unmarried woman and thus making remarriage for a woman more difficult.
साचा:Wiktionary
