

नवीन सदस्यांना मार्गदर्शनहा साचा अशुद्धलेखन, अविश्वकोशीय मजकूर अथवा मजकुरात अविश्वकोशीय लेखनशैली व विना-संदर्भ लेखन आढळल्यास वापरला जातो. कृपया या संबंधीची चर्चा चर्चापानावर पहावी. 
'कुत्तवरिसै'Kuttu Varisai or kutthu varesai is the unarmed component of silambam, a Dravidian martial art from Tamil Nadu in south India but also practiced by the Tamils of northeastern श्रीलंका and Malaysia. The term kuttu varisai means empty hand combat in Tamil and was first documented in Sangam literature of the 2nd-1st centuries BC. It is also called kai silambam which means hand silambam.
Kuttu varisai is used to improve footwork and athleticism through gymnastics, stretching, yoga and breathing exercises. Techniques incorporate striking, grappling, throws and locks. Strikes make use of almost every part of the body such as the fists, elbows, feet, knees, etc. Like many other Asian martial arts, patterns in kuttu varisai make use of animal-based sets including the tiger, snake, elephant, eagle and monkey forms. Advanced students are taught the art of pressure point fighting called Varma Kalai. 
Kaaladi, or footwork patterns, are a fundamental aspect of both kuttu varisai and silambam. There are sixteen of them among which four are very important. Traditionally, beginners practice only kaaladi for many months before learning any techniques but this is not often done today. Training in kuttu varisai allows the practitioner to get a feel of silambam stick movements using their bare hands, that is, fighters have a preliminary training with bare hands before going to the stick.
Gradually, fighters study footwork to move precisely in conjunction with the stick movements. The ultimate goal of the training is to defend against multiple armed opponents. In both kuttu varisai and silambam, kaaladi is the key in deriving power for the blows. It teaches how to advance and retreat, to get in range of the opponent without lowering one's defence, aids in hitting and blocking, and it strengthens the body immensely enabling the person to receive non-lethal blows and still continue the battle. The whole body is used to create power
Silambam, kuttu varisai's armed counterpart uses a variety of weapons which can be seen in many Chola bronze statues of various deities. Weapons include the trident, stick, sword, shield, dagger, knuckle duster, and whips with several flexible and metallic blades .
