पारंपारिक भारतीय चाली रितींना अनुसरून वैवाहिक प्रस्ताव म्हणजे एका कुटूंबातील कुटूंब प्रमुखाने/प्रतिनिधीने दुसऱ्या कुटूंबातील कुटुंबप्रमुख किंवा प्रतिनिधी कडे त्याच्या पाल्याचे |मध्यस्थामार्फत) आपल्या पाल्याशी विवाह करण्याबद्दल केलेली विचारणा होय. मध्यस्थ मार्फत सहसा कुटुंबाची आणि पाल्याची माहिती देणारे टिपण आणि छायाचित्र पाठविले जाते. 
प्रेम विवाहात विवाहोत्सूक व्यक्ति दुसऱ्या व्यक्तिस विवाह बंधन स्वकारण्या बद्दल मागणी अथवा पृच्छा करते. प्रेम विवाहात प्रस्ताव स्वाकारलागेल्यास ती एंगेजमेंट अथवा साखरपुड्याची सुरवात असु शकते,बरेच भारतीय यूवक परस्पर प्रस्ताव मान्य केल्या नंतरसुद्धा पालकांच्या परवानगी शिवाय विवाह किंवा प्रणय संबध प्रस्थापित करत नाहीत.
पारंपारिक अरेंज्ड मॅरेज पद्धतीत आलेल्या प्रस्तावातील एक किंवा अधिक सुयोग्य वाटणाऱ्या प्रस्ताव पाठवणाऱ्यांशी कुटुंबप्रमुख अथवा प्रतिनिधींशी संपर्क करून दाखवण्याचे कार्यक्रम आयोजित केले जातात.जर दोन्ही कुटुंबांनी होकार दिले तर वैवाहिक वाटाघाटी केल्या जातात.या वाटाघाटी यशस्वी झाल्या नंतरच पुढे साखरपुडा आणि शालमुदी हे विवाहपूर्व एंगेजमेंट स्तराचे कार्यक्रम पार पाडले जातात. 



The proposal of marriage is an event where one person in a relationship asks for the other's hand in marriage. If accepted, it marks the initiation of engagement. It often has a ritual quality, sometimes involving the presentation of an engagement ring and a formalized asking of a question such as "Will you marry me?". In western culture, it is traditional for the man to propose to his girlfriend, as opposed to the other way around, while literally kneeling before her, and sometimes physically putting the ring on her finger, as opposed to merely giving it to her.
The average duration of preceding courtship varies considerably throughout the world. 
In many Western cultures, the tradition has been for the man to propose to the woman. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the 29th of February in a Leap year is said to be the one day when a woman can propose to her partner. As a monarch, Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom had to propose to Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Finland has the same custom, with the addition that a man rejecting such a proposal was expected to buy his suitor enough cloth for a skirt as compensation. Although still very rare, a woman will occasionally propose to a man. However, as in the instance of Nietzsche, who came up with the idea of the superman, had someone else propose for him.
In many cultures, it is traditional for grooms to ask the bride's father for permission before proposing.
The most common marriage proposals in most western countries are made on a romantic vacation or over a romantic meal.Proposals made on or around special occasions are common in many cultures thoughout the world.
