मद्रास तमिळ किंवा मेड्रास भाषै 


, is a colloquial slang of Tamil language spoken in the city of चेन्नई, India . It is a loose polyglot blend of Tamil and English, with loanwords from Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Hindi and उर्दू भाषा.ह्याच कारणामुळे मद्रास भाषै साठी हल्ली टँग्लीश हा शब्दप्रयोग आस्तित्वात आला आहे.. जरी हिंग्लीश आणि टँग्लीश ह्या इंग्रजी भाषेच्या बोली असल्यातरी त्या पूर्णपणे भिन्न आहेत,हिंग्लीश चा संबंध बऱ्याच अंशी पिंग्लीश वगैरे उत्तरेतील भाषांशी असू शकतो ज्या हिंदी सारख्या आहेत.तमिळ ही इंडो युरोपिअन गटात मोडत नसल्याने त्यात हिंदी शब्द असण्याचे काहीच कारण नाही त्यामुळे टँग्लीश ही एक भिन्नच बोली आहे
After Madras Bashai became somewhat common in Madras, it became a source of satire for early Kollywood movies from the 1950s, in the form of puns and double entendres. Subsequent generations in चेन्नई identified with it and absorbed English constructs into the dialect, making it what it is today.
Madras bashai favours Tamil syntactic structures, with heavy use of English words..
The following examples illustrates the heavy use of English words, even for basic concepts:
Code-switching also plays a very important role in Madras bashai. For instance, a person aggrieved with the English in this article may plaintively wail:
किंवा खर्या तमिळभाषेतील वाक्य न समजल्याने एखादा विद्यार्थी नकारार्थी मान हलवत महाविद्यालयातील विद्यार्थ्यांसमोर देखील असे म्हणेल ::
इथे हे नमूद करणे महत्त्वाचे ठरेल जर हेच वाक्य तमिळ मध्ये व्यक्त करायचे असते:"वा तलैमुई ऍल्लाम्‌ मुलुक्क आंगिल्मदान् पेचूवांक्"
even in a colloquial form, the word choice itself would make the sentence sound lofty and formal; words such as talaimuai are associated with literature, not everyday speech.
Readers can understand immediately that this was done to save time, so that in the same period of time a Madras Tamilar can convey 1.5 times that of a Madurai, Tirunelveli Tamilar and 3 times that of an Erode Tamilar and 5 times that of a Coimbatore Tamilar One anomaly to this shortening rule is, some words get suffixed with the syllable 'ka'. So, summa = summaka, dhoora = dhooraka.
Some Tamil words are pronounced differently from Madurai Tamil . This practice is very similar to other dialects of Tamil. The pronunciation differences are usually accounted for by morphed and/or deleted vowels.
Questions with yes or no answers are framed by saying the statement whose truth is to be verified and then saying aa at the end with a rising inflexion like a question. The meaning of the aa is roughly analogous to Is it?. If the statement already ends in an aa or other interfering vowel sound, then the questioning aa can be made vaa in the interest of euphonics. Some speakers tend to carry the -aa even into full English conversations from force of habit. e.g.: You finished it aa? and also sometimes shortened to Finished-aa?
However, phrases like Late-aa? and Ready-aa? are usually used by the younger generation, and phrases of Madras Bashai in the above column are never used in polite form, and are usually used as street Tamil.
मद्रासी भाषेत परकीय भाषेतील अनेक शब्द, प्रत्यय आणि व्याकरणीय वैशिष्टे घेऊन अनेक शब्द बनले आहेत.यात इंग्रजी, फ्रेंच, डच, तेलुगू, हिंदी आणि कन्नड या भाषांतून जास्त शब्द आहेत.
इतर भाषांतून शब्द घेण्याची वेळ जेव्हा येते त्याबाबतीत असे म्हटले जाते "मेड्रास्सक्क निगर मेड्रास्से".इंग्रजी शब्द अगदी सहजरीत्या परभाषिक नसल्यासारखे कोणत्याही संदर्भात बिनधास्त वापरले जातात.. 'राँगु,' 'राईटु,' 'येच्चूस मी,' 'आडजिस्ट्,' 'अबेस,' 'आबस्काँड्,' 'बीटिफुल,' 'सुपरा,' 'फ्रूईट्,' 'पिलिम,' 'फिगुरू,' 'एस्केप्,' 'आक्किस्डू' इ. इ.. हिंदीचे ही थोडेफार योगदान आहेच जसे 'बेजार', 'नास्ता', ई.. तेलूगू: 'नैना', 'बावा', 'एप्पुडु', 'चेप्पु', डब्बु, डुड्डु ई.
A large part of Madras bashai is dedicated to exhibiting road rage and starting street fights.मचां किंवा माची हे अगदीच साधारणपणे सर्वत्र म्हटले जाते, म्हणजे बायकोचा भाऊ जसे मराठी किंवा हिंदीत साला असे म्हणतात ते.. Most common word to describe almost anyone.
However, not all of Madras Bashai is used predominantly for cursing. The Madras Bashai uses the English language in a very interesting manner.
