ए.आर.मुर्गदास किंवा मुरुगादास/मुरुगादॉसA. R. Murugadossएक भारतीय तमिळ चित्रपट दिग्दर्शक व लेखक.
A. R. Murugadoss is an acclaimed Tamil director in कॉलिवूड, the Chennai–based Tamil film industry and he is from Nadar family. He has done five films. He has directed top stars like Ajith Kumar, Vijaykanth, Surya, Chiranjeevi, Suresh Gopi and Aamir Khan. Four of his five films have been classified hits and Ghajini in Tamil especially received rave reviews for his style of directing. His latest venture is Ghajini in Hindi with Aamir Khan and Asin. The movie had a big opening and broke many records, and it's an all time blockbuster. It's the first Bollywood movie to cross the 200 crore barrier in the collection category. It's said that SRK have requested him a good script for his next project.
His native place is Kallakurichi, Tamil Nadu. He studied B.A in Bishop Heber College, Trichy during 1987-1990. In the College he had the great affinity towards Tamil films and friends. During his college days, he was active in cultural events, particularly in performing stage mimic shows imitating 'Kirubanantha Variar' and famous personalities of cine field. As a student, he was a calm and humble person but his multiple talents during college days and inter-college cultural competitions was often appreciated by all levels of students and teachers. His respect to the College and his close friend circle was expressed by using their names and the College Name in his second hit movie, 'Ramana'. He is a simple person with great talents and often recalls with his old friends the way he travelled to reach his present position.He is an ardent David Beckham fan.Mr. Murugadoss currently resides in an independent house in AVM Avenue, Virgambakkam, Chennai.
Right from his school days, Murugadoss was inclined towards writing short stories and novels. Encouraged by people close to him, he moved from Kallakurichi to Chennai. He started his career by working with writer Kalaimani, and then worked as an assistant director with S. J. Suryah for films like Vaali and Khushi.
His first movie as a director was Dheena, a Tamil film starring Ajith Kumar. It was a commercial mass-entertainer and was a blockbuster. His next one Ramana starring Vijayakanth was a commercial success and was one of the biggest hits of the year. His third movie was Ghajini starring Surya and Asin. The movie was one of the biggest blockbusters and he gained recognition as a director. His fourth movie Stalin starring Chiranjeevi is his only movie so far which is a flop. His fifth movie was Ghajini which was the Hindi remake of the Tamil movie, and was released on 25 December 2008. It became the biggest hit of that year. It broke all the records to become the first Bollywood film to cross collection of Rs.250 crore mark .
Many of his films are heavily inspired from other movies like Ghajini from momento,stalin from pay it forward and Dheena from Yadavam .
His next film, was first planned to be a Malayalam film, with Superstar Mohanlal in the lead role. But since, Mohanlal has no dates, for the next 18 months, Murugadoss has started shooting a Tamil film, with Surya doing the lead role. There were also rumours that his next film would be with Shah Rukh Khan.
