

सातपुडा नॅरो गेज रेल्वे मार्ग हे मध्य भारतातील सुमारे १,००० किमी लांबीचे रेल्वे मार्गांचे जाळे आहे. यातील काही भाग ब्रॉडगेजमध्ये रुपांतरित केला गेला आहे.
Following the Great Famine of 1876–78, the Bengal Nagpur Railway was formed for the purpose of upgrading the Nagpur Chhattisgarh Railway and then extending it via Bilaspur to Asansol, in order to develop a shorter Howrah-मुंबई route than the one via Allahabad. The Bengal Nagpur Railway main line from Nagpur to Asansol was opened for goods traffic on 1 February 1891. It was only after Kharagpur was linked from the west and the south that it was connected to Howrah in 1900.
10 years after the opening of the BNR, the company began planning to open a low-cost railway that would unite the region, allowing both access to the agricultural and mineral resources of the region, further safeguarding the inhabitants should another famine arise.
The railway connected Jabalpur with Gondia, Mandla Fort, Chhindwara and Nagpur. Nainpur was the focal point of the network and was even bestowed with the prestige of being a divisional headquarters for some time. The lines came up in the early years of the 20th century. The first portion of the Gondia-Nainpur line was opened on 13 April 1903, Nainpur and Chhindwara were connected in 1904 and Jabalpur in 1905. The Chhindwara-Pench Coalfield line came up in 1906-07 and the Nainpur-Mandla Fort link in 1909. The extensive network of साचा:RailGauge gauge tracks measured just over 1,000 km.
Conversion of the narrow gauge line to साचा:RailGauge is an approved project.
The gauge conversion programme includes the 147 km Nagpur-Chhindwara line, the 141 km Chhindwara-Nainpur line, the 110 km Jabalpur-Nainpur line, the 76 km Nainpur-Balaghat line and the ४२ किमी Nainpur-Mandla Fort line.
Jabalpur-Nainpur gauge conversion has been completed in 43.4 km patch from Jabalpur to Sukrimangla but the narrow gauge track has not been dismantled and narrow gauge trains still run on this section. The remaining 70.1 km patch from Sukrimangla to Nainpur may be converted in 2014 if the required land is made available in Seoni district.
On Nagpur-Chhindwara route, work for a 750-metre tunnel between Chhindwara and Saunsar patch is in progress.
The Satpura Express was a showpiece of these narrow gauge lines. It used to travel the 228 km distance between Jabalpur and Gondia in eight hours. With part of the line having been converted to साचा:RailGauge, it now runs 187 km from Jabalpur to Balaghat in a little less than seven hours.
