गुणक: 24°28′N 54°22′E / 24.46667°N 54.36667°E / 24.46667; 54.36667
अबुधाबी ही संयुक्त अरब अमिराती या पश्चिम आशियातील देशाची राजधानी व दुसर्‍या क्रमांकाचे मोठे शहर आहे. संयुक्त अरब अमिरातींच्या मध्यभागात, पश्चिम किनाऱ्यावर इराणाच्या आखातात उभ्या असलेल्या एका बेटावर अबुधाबी वसले आहे. शहराचे क्षेत्रफळ ६७,३४० वर्ग कि.मी. असून लोकसंख्या सुमारे ८,६०,००० आहे.
संयुक्त अरब अमिरातींची राजधानी येथे असल्याने संघशासनाची महत्त्वाची कार्यालये व संस्था अबुधाबीत आहेत. अमिरातींच्या राजघराण्याचे वास्त्यव्यही अबुधाबीतच आहे. वेगाने झालेला नागरी सुविधांचा विकास व अबुधाबीकरांच्या सरासरी दरडोई उत्पन्नाची उच्च पातळी यामुळे ते प्रगत महानगर बनले आहे. अमिरातींमधील नाना तर्‍हांच्या व्यावसायिक, औद्योगिक, राजकीय, सांस्कृतिक घडामोडींचे ते केंद्र आहे. अबुधाबी सिक्युरिटी बाजार, संयुक्त अरब अमिराती केंद्रीय बँक या महत्त्वाच्या वित्तीय संस्था येथेच असून अनेक बहुराष्ट्रीय कंपन्यांची कॉर्पोरेट मुख्यालयेही येथे आहेत. इ.स. २००८ साली संयुक्त अरब अमिरातींच्या सकल वार्षिक उत्पन्नात अबुधाबीचा वाटा ५६.७ %, इतका मोठा होता .
Parts of Abu Dhabi were settled as far back as the 3rd millennium BC and its early history fits the nomadic herding and fishing pattern typical of the broader region. Modern Abu Dhabi traces its origins to the rise of an important tribal confederation, the Bani Yas, in the late 18th century, which also assumed control of Dubai. In the 19th century the Dubai and Abu Dhabi branches parted ways.
Into the mid-20th century, the economy of Abu Dhabi continued to be sustained mainly by camel herding, production of dates and vegetables at the inland oases of Al Ain and Liwa, and fishing and pearl diving off the coast of Abu Dhabi city, which was occupied mainly during the summer months. Most dwellings in Abu Dhabi city were, at this time, constructed of palm fronds, with the wealthier families occupying mud huts. The growth of the cultured pearl industry in the first half of the twentieth century created hardship for residents of Abu Dhabi as pearls represented the largest export and main source of cash earnings.
In 1939, Sheikh Shakhbut Bin-Sultan Al Nahyan granted petroleum concessions, and oil was first found in 1958. At first, oil money had a marginal impact. A few lowrise concrete buildings were erected, and the first paved road was completed in 1961, but Sheikh Shakbut, uncertain whether the new oil royalties would last, took a cautious approach, preferring to save the revenue rather than investing it in development. His brother, Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, saw that oil wealth had the potential to transform Abu Dhabi. The ruling Al Nahyan family decided that Sheikh Zayed should replace his brother as ruler and carry out his vision of developing the country. On August 6, 1966, with the assistance of the British, Sheikh Zayed became the new ruler.
With the announcement by the UK in 1968 that it would withdraw from the Persian Gulf area by 1971, Sheikh Zayed became the main driving force behind the formation of the United Arab Emirates.
After the Emirates gained independence in 1971, oil wealth continued to flow to the area and traditional mud-brick huts were rapidly replaced with banks, boutiques and modern highrises.
At present, Abu Dhabi boasts the worlds highest absolute and per-capita level of sovereign wealth funds, calculated at USD 1,000,000.00 per inhabitant.
