The following sports make up the current Summer Olympic Games official program and are listed alphabetically according to the name used by the IOC. The figures in each cell indicate the number of events, for each sport, contested at the respective Games; a bullet denotes that the sport was contested as a demonstration sport.
Five of the twenty-eight sports consist of multiple disciplines. Disciplines from the same sport are grouped under the same color:
   Aquatics —   कनोइंग /Kayak —   सायकलिंग —   जिम्नॅस्टिक्स —   व्हॉलीबॉल 
The following sports were previously part of the Summer Olympic Games program as official sports, but are no longer on the current program. The numbers in each cell indicate the number of events for each sport that were contested at the respective Games; a bullet denotes that the sport was contested as a demonstration sport.
The following sports or disciplines have been demonstrated at the Summer Olympic Games for the years shown, but have never been included on the official Olympic program:




The Beijing Olympic Committee has received permission to organize a wushu competition, but it will not be considered a demonstration or exhibition sport at the 2008 Summer Olympics.
Before 1924, when the first Winter Olympic Games were celebrated, sports held on ice, like figure skating and ice hockey, were contested at the Summer Olympics. These two sports made their debuts at the 1908 and the 1920 Summer Olympics respectively, but were permanently integrated in the Winter Olympics program in 1924. The International Winter Sports Week, later dubbed the I Olympic Winter Games and retroactively recognized as such by the IOC, consisted of nine sports. The number of sports contested at the Winter Olympics has since been decreased to seven, comprising a total of fifteen disciplines.
A sport or discipline must be widely practiced in at least twenty-five countries on three continents in order to be included on the Winter Olympics program.
The following sports make up the current Winter Olympic Games official program and are listed alphabetically, according to the name used by the IOC. The figures in each cell indicate the number of events, for each sport, that were contested at the respective Games ; a bullet denotes that the sport was contested as a demonstration sport. On some occasions, both official medal events and demonstration events were contested in the same sport at the same Games.
Three out of the seven sports consist of multiple disciplines. Disciplines from the same sport are grouped under the same color:
   Bobsleigh —   Skating —   Skiing
The following sports have been demonstrated at the Winter Olympic Games for the years shown, but have never been included on the official Olympic program:

तिरंदाजी •अ‍ॅथलेटिक्स •बॅडमिंटन •बेसबॉल •बास्केटबॉल •बीच व्हॉलीबॉल •बॉक्सिंग •कनूइंग •सायकलिंग •डायव्हिंग •इकेस्ट्रियन •हॉकी •तलवारबाजी •फुटबॉल •जिम्नॅस्टिक्स •हँडबॉल • ज्युदो •मॉडर्न पेंटॅथलॉन •रोइंग •सेलिंग •नेमबाजी •सॉफ्टबॉल •जलतरण •तालबद्ध जलतरण •टेबल टेनिस •ताईक्वांदो •टेनिस •ट्रायथलॉन •व्हॉलीबॉल •वॉटर पोलो •वेटलिफ्टिंग •कुस्ती 
आल्पाइन स्कीइंग •बायॅथलॉन •बॉबस्ले •क्रॉस कंट्री स्कीइंग •कर्लिंग •फिगर स्केटिंग •फ्रीस्टाईल स्कीइंग •आइस हॉकी •लुज •नॉर्डिक सामायिक •शॉर्ट ट्रॅक स्पीड स्केटिंग •स्केलेटन •स्की जंपिंग •स्नोबोर्डिंग •स्पीड स्केटिंग 
बास्क पेलोटा •क्रिकेट •क्रोके •गोल्फ •जु दे पौमे •लॅक्रॉस •पोलो •रॅकेट्स •रोक •रग्बी युनियन •रस्सीखेच •वॉटर मोटोस्पोर्ट्स
