बागमाने टेक पार्क बंगळूर राजा बागमाने ह्यांच्या बागमाने डेव्हलपर्स कंपनीचे बंगळूरमधील एक टेक्नॉलॉजी पार्क.Bagmane Tech Park is a Software technology Park in India. The park is situated at Sir C V Raman Nagar in बंगळुरू. This park is built and maintained by Bagmane Group. The park shares its boundaries with HAL and DRDO and is near the HAL Airport. It is equipped with all modern class facilities and is surrounded by a lake near the entrance. It also contains a Shopping mall, and a 4.7 hectare lake in its centre. 
The park is home to some of the most prominent companies in world like Dover Corporation, Yahoo!, Oracle Corporation, HP, Juniper Networks, Lenovo, Motorola, Texas Instruments, MphasiS, Samsung India SoftwareOperations, First Indian Corporation, Sasken, Novell, Cognizant Technology Solutions, Volvo, Dell, Tesco Hindustan Service, Lifetree, and Phoenix_Technologies.
The park consists of 10 Large Buildings, 9 completed and 1 in construction
1. I-flex park - House of I-flex solutions --> Changed to Oracle by the end of 2008.
2. Bagmane Commerz - House of Lenovo and Juniper Networks.It also has Barista coffee centre, McDonalds, Citibank ATM, SBI ATM, Corporation Bank office, Karvy Finapolis, a food court and shopping mall.
3. Bagmane Lake view - It is the largest of all the buildings and House of Samsung India Software Operations, MphasiS, Bagmane Builders, Motorola, First India Corporation ,Volvo.
4. Cognizant Technology Solutions India Pvt. Ltd.,
5. Bagmane Laurel - Its the House of Dover Corporation, MphasiS, Cypress_Semiconductor, Sandisk and TVS ICS. Recently Novell has opened its Development Centre in this Building. Phoenix_Technologies has opened one more development center in India here, ALSTOM Projects India Limited will be operating here shortly.
6. Bagmane Parin - Its the House of MphasiS, DELL R&D, and Sasken.
7. Bagmane Tridib - Its the House of Tecnotree Convergence Ltd, Volvo, Yahoo and Samsung India Software Operations.
Few companies like Texas Instruments, Motorola and Cognizant Technology Solutions have their independent buildings not shared by any other companies.
Some companies like Texas Instruments, Oracle Corporation, Samsung, MphasiS and Novell run their private pickup and drop bus services, while others rely on special BMTC service for employee drop and pickup. These buses run throughout Bangalore thrice in the morning and thrice in the evening/night.
Several companies in the tech park have come together and started Bagmanate Tech Park bus service using Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation buses. The buses connect different parts of बंगळुरू to the tech park and is available only for people working on the tech park. The buses display the board 'BTP'.


गुणक: 12°58′43″N 77°39′40″E / 12.978611°N 77.661111°E / 12.978611; 77.661111
