भारत वेगवेगळ्या शंभर भाषांचे घर आहे. बहुतेक भारतीय हिंद-आर्य समूहील भाषा बोलतात जी इंडो-युरोपियन भाषांची ही एक शाखा आहे. द्रविड, ऑस्ट्रोएस्ट्रीएटिक  आणि साइनो-तिबेटी सुद्धा बोलली जाते. या व्यतिरिक्त हिमालयाची काही भाषा आज ही वर्गीकृत नाही. एस आई एल एथनोलॉगच्या सूची नुसार भारतात ४१५ जीवंत भाषा आहेत.


India has 23 constitutionally recognized official languages. Hindi and English are the official languages used by the Central Government. State governments use respective official languages.
Hindi is the most widely spoken language in northern parts of India. The Indian census takes the widest possible definition of "Hindi" as a broad variety of "Hindi languages". According to 2001 Census, 53.6% of Indian population declared that they speak Hindi either as first or second language, in which 41% of them have declared it as their native language or mother tongue. 13% Indians declared that they can speak English as a second language.
Thirteen languages account for more than 1% of Indian population each, and between themselves for over 95%; all of them are "scheduled languages of the constitution". Scheduled languages spoken by fewer than 1% of Indians are Santali, Kashmiri, Nepali, Sindhi, Konkani, Dogri, Meitei, Bodo and Sanskrit . The largest language that is not "scheduled" is Bhili, followed by Gondi, Khandeshi, Tulu and Kurukh .
Indian population in 1991 exhibited 19.4% of bilingualism and 7.2% of trilingualism, so that the total percentage of "native languages" is at about 127%. 
India has a Greenberg's diversity index of 0.914, i.e. two people selected at random from the country will have different native languages in 91.4% of cases.
Ordered by number of speakers as first language.
The 2001 census recorded 29 individual languages as having more than 1 million native speakers . The languages in bold are scheduled languages . The first table is restricted to only speaking populations for scheduled languages.
of total population
percentage of total
population

* Excludes figures of Paomata, Mao-Maram and Purul sub-divisions of Senapati district of Manipur for 2001.** The percentage of speakers of each language for 2001 has been worked out on the total population of India excluding the population of Mao-Maram, Paomata and Purul subdivisions of Senapati district of Manipur due to cancellation of census results.
Each of the languages of the 2001 census subsumes one or more mother tongues. Speaker numbers are available for these mother tongues and they are also included in the speaker numbers for their respective language. The following table lists those mother tongues that have more than one million speakers. Per the General Notes from the 2001 census: "Mother tongue is the language spoken in childhood by the person’s mother to the person. If the mother died in infancy, the language mainly spoken in the person’s home in childhood will be the mother tongue."
चुका उधृत करा: "lower-alpha" नावाच्या गटाकरिता खूणपताका उपलब्ध आहेत, पण संबंधीत  खूण मिळाली नाही.
