शहापूर तालुका हा भारताच्या महाराष्ट्र राज्यातील ठाणे जिल्ह्याचा एक तालुका आहे.



Shahapur is located at 19°27′N 73°20′E / 19.45°N 73.33°E / 19.45; 73.33. It has an average elevation of 46 metres .
The total water supply to mumbai city is 3000 MLD per day. The four damns, namely, Tansa, Bhatsa, Vaitarna and Modak Sagar, alone caters 2900 MLD per day. The 100 MLD are supplied by two lakes located around Borivali, TUlsi and Vihar. Since Shahapur supplies almost the entire drinking water to Mumbai, the government of Maharashtra has declared this town a No Chemical Zone. Consequently, no one can start a chemical industry in this area.
 Demographics
As of 2001 India census{{GR|India}m}, Shahapur had a populatmion of 50,489. Males constitute 51% of the population and females 49%. Shahapur has an average literacy rate of 87%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 89%, and female literacy is 84%. In Shahapur, 12% of the population is under 6 yemars of age.
 this is shahapur
Shahapur is town on mumbai agra highway,being taluka place and good connectivity to mumbai. Its growing fast construction boom is clearly seen like mumbai suburbs.Infrastructure is crumbling due to major increase in vehicles due to economic boom. Local transport mainly depend on auto rikshaws, buses and private vehicles. Shahapur is connected to all major cities of maharashtra.
Recently it has a major boom in industrial sector as it has a major advantage of good transport facility easily available labour class and also linked with mumbai suburbs with Railway ].
 How to Reach
To reach Shahapur, you may either take a Maharashtra State Transport bus that leads to Shahapur or take Asangaon or Kasara local train on central route of Mumbai Suburban Railway. To reach Shahapur by road come from the National highway no. 3. One can also reach Shahpur from National Highway No. 4 from Khopoli Haal Phata through Karjat - Murbad State highway or from Chauk - Karjat
1) By BUS )- Mumbai - Shirdi, Mumbai - Dhulia,Mumbai - Nashik By Any Bus we can go SHAHAPUR
2) BY TRAIN )- CST-Kasara CST-Asanagaon By these train we can go SHAHAPUR
 Economy
The dominant economy of Shahapur is agriculture. However, recently there have been some spurts of Residential construction taking place. Education
