

८३वे ऑस्कर पुरस्काराचे नामांकन मंगळवार, जानेवारी २५, इ.स. २०११ रोजी, बेव्हेर्ली हिल्स, कॅलिफोर्निया येथील सॅम्युयेल गोल्डव्हिन थेटर येथे जाहीर करण्यात आले. हे जाहीर करण्यासाठी ऑस्कर पुरस्कार संघटनेचे अध्यक्ष टोम शेरॅक व अभिनेत्री मॉनीक उप्सथीत होते. द किंग्स स्पीच चित्रपटाला १२ नामांकन व ट्रु ग्रिट चित्रपटाला १० नामांकन मिळाले. विजेत्यांची घोषणा फेब्रुवारी २७, इ.स. २०११ रोजी ८३वे ऑस्कर पुरस्कार सोहळ्याच्या कार्यक्रमात करण्यात आल.
या वर्षी एकूण २४ पुरस्कार दिले गेले.

नामांकने -

पुरस्कार -

ऑस्कर पुरस्कार संघटनेने नोव्हेंबर १३, इ.स. २०१० रोजी, २रे वार्षिक गव्हर्नर पुरस्काराचा कार्यक्रम आयोजीत केला, जेथे खालील पुरस्कार देण्यात आले.
ऑस्कर पुरस्कार सोहळ्यात सिलीन डीयोन हीने स्माइल हे गाण गाऊन खालील कलाकारांना व लोकांना मानवंदना वाहीली. हॅले बेरी हिने सुद्दा ह्या सोहळ्यात लेना होर्नला मानवंदना वाहीली



Opting for younger faces for the ceremony, producers Bruce Cohen and Don Mischer chose James Franco and Anne Hathaway as co-hosts. Franco's nomination for Best Actor marked the first time since 1973 that an actor or actress hosted the award ceremony in the same year that he or she was nominated for an acting award. At the 45th Academy Awards, Michael Caine co-hosted the ceremony and was nominated for Best Actor in Sleuth. The last host to win an acting award was David Niven, who won the Oscar for Best Actor in Separate Tables at the 31st Academy Awards in 1959.
This marked the first time since 1957 that an Academy Awards ceremony was co-hosted by a male/female duo. It was also the first time in the history of the awards broadcasts that a male/female duo physically shared the same stage in their hosting duties.
For the second consecutive year, the field of major nominees included at least one blockbuster at the American and Canadian box offices. However, only three of the nominees had grossed over $100 million before the nominations were announced, compared with five from the previous year. The combined gross of the ten Best Picture nominees when the Oscars were announced was $1.2 billion, the second-highest ever behind 2009. The average gross was $119.3 million.
Two of the ten Best Picture nominees were among the top ten releases in box office during the nominations. At the time of the announcement of nominations on January 25, Toy Story 3 was the highest-grossing film among the Best Picture nominees with $414.9 million in domestic box office receipts. The only other top ten box office hit to receive a nomination was Inception which earned $292.5 million. Among the remaining eight nominees, True Grit was the next-highest-grossing film with $137.9 million followed by The Social Network, Black Swan $83.2 million, The Fighter, The King's Speech, The Kids Are All Right, 127 Hours, and finally Winter's Bone .
Of the top 50 grossing movies of the year, 55 nominations went to 15 films on the list. Only Toy Story 3, Inception, How to Train Your Dragon, True Grit, The Social Network, The Town, Black Swan, and The Fighter were nominated for directing, acting, screenwriting, Best Picture or Animated Feature. The other top-50 box office hits that earned nominations were Alice in Wonderland, Iron Man 2, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Part 1, Tangled, Tron: Legacy, Salt, and Unstoppable 
For the sixth year in a row the award for Best Picture went to an R rated film . Despite having the second most nominations of the show with ten, True Grit failed to win anything.
This was the first time since 2000 when the winner of Best Picture also won Best Actor. For the fifth time in history, two performers won for playing a parent and child, but it was the first time that both awards came in the supporting categories; Brenda Fricker and Daniel Day-Lewis also won for playing a mother and son in 1989's My Left Foot, and on three occasions actresses have won for playing a mother and daughter. Also notable was that three of the four acting awards went to performers playing real people, with Bale's subject Dicky Eklund being present at the ceremony; only Best Actress recipient Natalie Portman won for not playing a real person – an ironic twist, given that the Best Actress category had in recent years been the one most constantly won for biographical portrayals .While The King's Speech was the first period film since Chicago to win best picture, which is intersting since the past has usually gone to period films. Yet in the 2000s it went to films taking place in the present usually, although No Country for Old Men did take place in the 1980's yet would not be considered one.
The show received a mixed reception from media publications. Some media outlets were very critical of the show. Most critics judged the hosting duties of Hathaway and Franco as a mismatched affair, with some praising Hathaway's hosting duties while criticizing Franco's unease on stage. Film critic Roger Ebert criticized the telecasting noting that it was "The worst Oscarcast I've seen, and I go back awhile." He went on to praise the winners of the night, but he ended his review with the words, "Dead. In. The. Water."
पुरस्कार वितरणाच्या दोन दिवस आधी डेडलाइन.कॉम संकेतस्ळावर निक्की फिंकने या सोहळ्याचा कार्यक्रम जाहीर केला होता. यात फिंकने लिहिले होते की टॉम हँक्स पहिला पुरस्कार प्रदान करेल, कार्यक्रमाचा सुरुवातील यजमान फ्रँको आणि हॅथावे सर्वोत्तम चित्रपटासाठी नामांकित चित्रपटांतून दिसतील, पूर्वी यजमानपद भूषविलेला बिली क्रिस्टल पाहुणा म्हणून मंचावर येईल, कॅथ्रिन बिगेलो सर्वोत्तम दिग्दर्शनाचा पुरस्कार प्रदान करेल आणि स्टीवन स्पीलबर्ग सर्वोत्तम चित्रपट पुरस्कार प्रदान करेल.


