

Master of Commerce is a postgraduate Masters Degree focusing on commerce, management and economics related subjects. Like the undergraduate Bachelor of Commerce, the degree is offered in Commonwealth nations.
The Master of Commerce typically requires one year of full-time study. The curriculum is usually concentrated on one subject area — such as accounting, economics, finance or marketing — and emphasises underlying theory. Relatedly, programs usually include a thesis component, or may even be exclusively research based.
Given this structure, the MComm differs from other business and management degrees. Its concentration on one area distinguishes it from generalist degrees, such as the मास्टर ऑफ बिझिनेस ऍडमिनीस्ट्रेशन; some universities offer the MComm in general management, although this is more similar to the Master of Management than to the MBA.
As compared to specialised Professional degrees - such as the Master of Science in Finance or Master of Accounting - the MComm places more emphasis on theory, although sometimes less on practice; generally, though, there is a close correspondence between these degrees and the related MComm; see also Master of Science in Management. 
Admission is usually on the basis of an existing Bachelor's degree, generally the Bachelor of Commerce. Depending on the degree focus, a related undergraduate major and / or a fairly strong quantitative background may also be a prerequisite. Some programs admit students from non-business backgrounds such as liberal arts, engineering, or the sciences - these programs usually require that students complete a bridging course.
Based on specialisation, graduates are typically employed in fields related to their degree focus, such as financial services, marketing and project management; graduates also often work in general management and business consulting . The Master of Commerce includes a research component and thus provides access to a doctorate; progressing from the Master of Commerce, a student can pursue a Doctor of Commerce, Doctor of Business Administration, or a Doctor of Philosophy degree program.
साचा:Academic degrees
