The major prestigious awards handed out in the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक are the "मालिकावीर" and the "Man of the Match" in the Final awards.
मालिकावीर
सामनावीर
For a long period of time prior to the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, awards were handed out to players for their performance in each match. These player's were named the Man of the Match. This trend continued into the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक. To receive a Man of the Match award in the final generally meant that one had put up a match-winning performance for their team and, in essence, won their team the World Cup.
Since १९९२, at the end of the World Cup, one player is declared as "मालिकावीर". 
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९७५ - Clive Lloyd - १०२ runs from ८५ ballsThe १९७५ क्रिकेट विश्वचषक was the first World Cup. The final was between the Australian cricket team and the West Indies cricket team. The West Indies were sent in to bat by the Australian captain Ian Chappell and slumped to ३/५० leaving Rohan Kanhai and captain Clive Lloyd at the crease. The pair combined for a partnership of १४९ runs for the ४th wicket and brought the West Indies back into the match. Clive Lloyd top scored, with १०२ runs coming off just ८५ balls. When Lloyd fell the West Indies were ४/१९९. A lower order batting collapse took the West Indies to ६/२०९ before the tailenders combined to achieve the total of २९१.
The Australians began their chase on track, with brothers Greg Chappell and Ian Chappell taking them to २/११५. However, the Australian innings collapsed when Lloyd ran out Ian Chappell and subsequently took the wicket of Walters. Australia took their score to २७४ all out and West Indies won the match. Fittingly, captain Clive Lloyd was named Man of the Match.
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९७९ - विव्ह रिचर्ड्स - १३८ not outIn the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९७९, the West Indies were once again in the final, this time against England. England won the toss and sent the West Indies in to bat. The West Indies dropped to ३/५५ and later ४/९९ before विव्ह रिचर्ड्स and Collis King combined for a १३९ run partnership before King was dismissed for ८६. Richards remained and continued to score with the tail, who were all dismissed for ducks. Richards remained on १३८ not out and the West Indies ended on ९/२८६.
Richards bowled १० overs economically and ended with figures of ०/३५ as England began a slow and steady chase to the West Indies' target. However, the English team inexplicably collapsed from २/१८३ to १९४ all out to give the West Indies the world cup for the second time in a row. विव्ह रिचर्ड्स was named man of the match.
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९८३ - Mohinder Amarnath - ३/१२ and २६The क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९८३ final was on a pitch considered very difficult to bat on. The final was between the Indian cricket team and the West Indies. With the West Indies sending India in to bat. India's star batsman Sunil Gavaskar was out early in the innings as India fell to १ wicket for २ runs as Mohinder Amarnath came in to bat with Kris Srikkanth. The two managed to combine to form a gritty partnership which ended at २/५९ when Srikkanth fell. Amarnath still remained and took India to २/९० before losing his wicket. He scored २६ off ८० balls. India were all out for १८३, with only three batsmen, one of them Amarnath, crossing the २०-mark.
The West Indies began in similar fashion but a top-order collapse saw them fall to ६/७६ through the bowling of Madan Lal and Kapil Dev. However, from there on the pair of Jeff Dujon and Malcolm Marshall combined to take the West Indies past the १०० mark. However, Amarnath came in to bowl and took both their wickets, leaving the West Indies at ८/१२४, before he trapped Michael Holding leg before wicket to take India to a ४३ run victory. Amarnath had innings-best figures of ३/१२ and he was commended for his all-round performance with the Man of the Match award.
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९८७ - डेव्हिड बून - ७५ runsThe क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९८७ final was between England and Australia. Australia won the toss and elected to bat, sending in openers डेव्हिड बून and Geoff Marsh. Australia got off to a very good start thanks to Boon's batting. Boon was part of a ७५ run stand with Marsh and a ७६ run stand with Dean Jones and took Australia to १/१५०. Boon was out for ७५ with Australia at ४/१६८ before Border and Veletta took Australia to २५३ in the ५० overs. Boon was the only batsman to cross ५०.
In the second innings, England ended at २४६ with various Australian bowlers, namely Craig McDermott, Steve Waugh, Simon O'Donnell and Allan Border, sharing the wickets. Boon participated in the run out of John Emburey when England were ५/२१८. Australia won the World Cup and Boon was named Man of the Match.
मालिकावीर१९९२ - मार्टिन क्रोव - ४५६ runsNew Zealand batsman and captain मार्टिन क्रोव began the १९९२ क्रिकेट विश्वचषक in Australia and New Zealand with a strong १०० not out against Australia. In the next two innings he scored only ५ and ३ respectively, but came back with ७४ not out against Zimbabwe and ८१ not out against the West Indies. In the remaining group matches, he scored २४, ७३ not out and ३ as New Zealand progressed to the Semi-Finals. In the Semi-Final match against Pakistan, Crowe top-scored with ९१ off just ८३ balls, taking New Zealand from २/३९ to ६/२२१ as they ended on ७/२६२. However, it wasn't enough as Pakistan won with one over to spare. Pakistan went on to win the World Cup but Crowe was awarded the first मालिकावीर because of his exceptional batting performances. He averaged ११४.०० and had scored १ century and ३ fifties. 
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९९२ - वासिम अक्रम - ३३ runs off १९ balls and ३ wicketsThe क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९९२ final was between Pakistan and England. Pakistan elected to bat first. After the openers failed to make any impact, Javed Miandad and Imran Khan carried the Pakistani innings through to ४/१९७, when Inzamam-ul-Haq was joined by वासिम अक्रम at the crease. Inzamam-ul-Haq hit ४२ off ३५ balls while Akram hit ३३ off १९ balls before being run out on the last ball of the innings, taking Pakistan to ४/२४९ in ५० overs.
England's innings started badly, when Akram dismissed Ian Botham for ०. England drooped to ४/६९ before some resistance was provided by Allan Lamb and नील फेरब्रदर, who took England to ४/१४१ and within hope of achieving the target. However, at this point Akram returned to the attack and dismissed Lamb for ३१ and the next batsman, Lewis, for ०. England did not recover and were all out for २२७. Akram finished with ३/४९, his all-round performance earnt him Man of the Match.
मालिकावीर१९९६ - Sanath Jayasuriya - २२१ runs and ७ wicketsBatsman Sanath Jayasuriya played in ६ matches in the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९९६, of which Sri Lanka won them all. After a score of just ६ against Zimbabwe. Jayasuriya performed better against India, helping Sri Lanka to victory with ७९ off ७६ balls. He went on to score ४४ runs against Kenya and ८२ against England. In the semi-final against India, Jayasuriya was out for १ but contributed with the ball taking the wickets of सचिन तेंडुलकर and Sanjay Manjrekar. His wickets triggered a collapse which reduced India from १/९८ to ८/१२० and took Sri Lanka to the final. Jayasuriya did not perform in the final, he scored just ९ and got १/४३ with the ball.
Although other batsmen, including सचिन तेंडुलकर who scored a record ५२३ runs at an average of ८७.१६, scored more runs for him. Jayasuriya was awarded मालिकावीर for his aggressive and exciting strokeplay and his match-winning qualities.
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९९६ - Aravinda de Silva - १०७ not out and ३/४२
The क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९९६ final was between Australia and Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka won the toss and sent in Australia to bat. Australia reached १/१३७ in the २७th over with Mark Taylor and Ricky Ponting dominating proceedings. De Silva then came in to bowl and dismissed both Taylor and Ponting, falling to ४/१५६ before Stuart Law and Steve Waugh stabilized the innings. When they both fell, Australia was at ६/२०२ with Ian Healy and Michael Bevan at the crease, De Silva bowled out Healy but Bevan persisted, taking Australia to २४१.
Australia was forced to bowl in the foggy dew, but still shortened Sri Lanka's chances with quick dismissals of the openers, as Sri Lanka slumped to २/२३. Then De Silva came into the crease and played "on the biggest occasion of his life, played with quite wonderfuljudgment". He scored १०७ from १२४ balls, only the ३rd ever century in the World Cup final, and partnered with Asanka Gurusinha and अर्जुन रणतुंगा, to take Sri Lanka to what ended up an easy victory. De Silva was awarded Man of the Match.
मालिकावीर१९९९ - Lance Klusener - २८१ runs and १७ wicketsThe all-rounder Lance Klusener was part of the South African team in a time in which it was very successful in One Day International cricket. He played ९ matches in the World Cup and almost made it १० with his final overs cameo against Australia in the semi-final that went in vain as the match was tied. Klusener averaged १४०.५ with the bat and २०.५८ with the ball in this World Cup.
Klusener opened his World Cup with a win against India in which he took ३/६६ and made १२ not out. He continued his form in subsequent matches, scoring ५२* and ३/२१ against Sri Lanka, ४८* and १/१६ against England, ५/२१ against Kenya, ५२* and १/३६ in a losing cause against Zimbabwe to carry South Africa through to the Super Sixes stage. In the Super Sixes, Klusener failed with the bat for the first time in the Cup, scoring only ४ against New Zealand, but he still took २/४६ with the ball. He scored ४६* and took १/४१ against Pakistan and scored ३६ and १/५३ against Australia in another losing cause. In the World Cup semi-final, Klusener came in when the score was ६/१७५, with the South Africans required ३९ in ५ overs to win. Klusener scored ३१ off just १६ balls and brought South Africa to the level of a tie, but then a run out with Allan Donald resulted in the match remaining tied and Australia passed through to the final per past results with Klusener remaining stranded not out.
Klusener had a strike rate of १२२, indicative of his quick-paced batting, but his average was higher than even his strike rate. While राहुल द्रविड was the leading run-scorer and Shane Warne was the leading wicket taker . His all-round performance earnt him the man of the series award. 
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर१९९९ - Shane Warne - ४/३३The क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, १९९९ final was between Australia and Pakistan. Pakistan won the toss and elected to bat first. The openers were out early as Pakistan got to ३/६८ at the २०th over. Australian leg spin bowler Shane Warne was brought into the attack and made impact, bowling out Ijaz Ahmed for २२ and having Moin Khan caught behind for ६, reducing Pakistan to ५/९१ after २७ overs. Pakistan attempted to rebuild their innings through their long line of all-rounders, but Warne and Paul Reiffel eliminated the threat. Warne got the wickets of captain वासिम अक्रम and dangerous all-rounder शहीद आफ्रीदी. Pakistan were all out for १३२ and Warne ended with ४/३३.
The target was of no concern to the Australia team, winning by ८ wickets with ३० overs in hand, with ॲडम गिलक्रिस्ट top scoring with ५४. Warne was awarded Man of the Match for his match-winning bowling performance.
मालिकावीर२००३ - सचिन तेंडुलकर - ६७३ runs and २ wickets 
India was quite successful in the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, २००३. Apart from making it to the final, they only lost two matches, both to champions Australia. One of the major reasons for this success was the record-breaking performance of "Little Master" सचिन तेंडुलकर. In ११ innings Tendulkar scored ६७३ runs at an average of ६१.१८. He started off his World Cup campaign with a ५२ against the Netherlands and a gritty ३६ against Australia while all else was collapsing. From that point on in the World Cup, he scored consistently. After an ८१ and १५२ against Zimbabwe and Namibia respectively, he scored ५० against England and ९८ against Pakistan in what was the highest successful run chase in the whole World Cup. He failed to perform against New Zealand and Kenya in the Super Sixes, but scored ९७ against Sri Lanka to seal a १८० run victory. He came back in the semi-final against Kenya to score ८३. However, in the final, he did not perform, scoring only ४ against a mammoth Australia target.
Out of his ११ innings, Tendulkar was unlucky to only get १ century. He reached ९८ against Pakistan and ९७ against Sri Lanka before being dismissed. He also reached the ८०s twice. In his ११ World Cup innings, Tendulkar scored ७ ५०+ scores. Tendulkar remains the record-holder of numerous records in World Cups.
अंतिम सामना सामनावीर२००३ - Ricky Ponting - १४० not outThe final of the क्रिकेट विश्वचषक, २००३ was between India and Australia. India won the toss and sent Australia in to bat. The Australian openers wreaked havoc on the Indian pace bowlers and only Harbhajan Singh could take wickets. In the १४th over, ॲडम गिलक्रिस्ट was dismissed by Singh and Ricky Ponting walked in to bat. Australia was २-१२५ in the २०th over when Ponting was joined by Damien Martyn at the crease. Australia achieved २०० in just ३५ overs. Martyn and Ponting held a १०० run partnership off just १०९ balls. Australia achieved the highest partnership for this ground in ODIs. In the ४३rd over Australia achieved २५०. Ponting then reached his century which included ५ sixes and Australia quickened the pace, scoring ११० runs in the next seven overs at १५.७ runs per over. Ponting scored १४०, the highest in a World Cup final and Martyn scored ८८, his highest against India.
India's start was not so dominating, सचिन तेंडुलकर being dismissed for just ४. India fell to ३/५९ before राहुल द्रविड and Virender Sehwag combined to take the total to ३/१४७. India reached २३४ before they were all out in the ३८th over. Ponting, Australia's captain, was awarded Man of the Match.
