

सर्जनशील भाषाशास्त्र · उच्चारशास्त्रपदरचनाशास्त्र · वाक्यरचना · शब्दसंग्रह सय शब्दार्थशास्त्र · सापेक्ष अर्थच्छटाशास्त्र
तौलनिक भाषाशास्त्र · व्युत्पत्तीऐतिहासिक भाषाशास्त्र · उच्चारशास्त्रसामाजिक भाषाशास्त्र
जाणीव भाषाशास्त्र गणनात्मक भाषाशास्त्रन्याय भाषाशास्त्रभाषा प्राप्ती भाषा मूल्यांकनभाषा विकास भाषा शिक्षणआदेशात्मक भाषाशास्त्र भाषाशास्त्रीय मानवशास्त्रचेतन भाषाशास्त्र मानस भाषाशास्त्र 	भाषाशैली शास्त्र 
भाषाशास्त्राचा इतिहासभाषाशास्त्रज्ञांची यादीभाषाशास्त्रातील न सुटलेले प्रश्न
Semantics is the study of meaning, usually in language. The word "semantics" itself denotes a range of ideas, from the popular to the highly technical. It is often used in ordinary language to denote a problem of understanding that comes down to word selection or connotation. This problem of understanding has been the subject of many formal inquiries, over a long period of time. The word is derived from the Greek word σημαντικός, "significant", from σημαίνω, "to signify, to indicate" and that from σήμα, "sign, mark, token". In linguistics, it is the study of interpretation of signs or symbols as used by agents or communities within particular circumstances and contexts. Within this view, sounds, facial expressions, body language, proxemics have semantic content, and each has several branches of study. In written language, such things as paragraph structure and punctuation have semantic content; in other forms of language, there is other semantic content. 
The formal study of semantics intersects with many other fields of inquiry, including proxemics, lexicology, syntax, pragmatics, etymology and others, although semantics is a well-defined field in its own right, often with synthetic properties. In philosophy of language, semantics and reference are related fields. Further related fields include philology, communication, and semiotics. The formal study of semantics is therefore complex.
The word semantic in its modern sense is considered to have first appeared in French as sémantique in Michel Bréal's 1897 book, Essai de sémantique'.In international scientific vocabulary semantics is also called semasiology.The discipline of Semantics is distinct from Alfred Korzybski's General Semantics, which is a system for looking at the semantic reactions of the whole human organism in its environment to some event, symbolic or otherwise.
साचा:CleanupIn linguistics, semantics is the subfield that is devoted to the study of meaning, as inherent at the levels of words, phrases, sentences, and larger units of discourse .The basic area of study is the meaning of signs, and the study of relations between different linguistic units: homonymy, synonymy, antonymy, polysemy, paronyms, hypernymy, hyponymy, meronymy, metonymy, holonymy, exocentricity / endocentricity, linguistic compounds. A key concern is how meaning attaches to larger chunks of text, possibly as a result of the composition from smaller units of meaning.Traditionally, semantics has included the study of sense and denotative reference, truth conditions, argument structure, thematic roles, discourse analysis, and the linkage of all of these to syntax.
Formal semanticists are concerned with the modeling of meaning in terms of the semantics of logic. Thus the sentence John loves a bagel can be broken down into its constituents, of which the unit loves may serve as both syntactic and semantic head.
In the late 1960s, Richard Montague proposed a system for defining semantic entries in the lexicon in terms of lambda calculus. In these terms, the syntactic parse of the sentence abovewould now indicate loves as the head, and its entry in the lexicon would point to the arguments as the agent, John, and the object, bagel, with a special role for the article "a" . This resulted in the sentence being associated with the logical predicate loves, thuslinking semantics to categorial grammar models of syntax.The logical predicate thus obtained would be elaborated further, e.g. using truth theory models, which ultimately relate meanings to a set of Tarskiian universals, which may lie outside the logic. The notion of such meaning atoms or primitives is basic to the language of thought hypothesis from the 70s.
Despite its elegance, Montague grammar was limited by the context-dependent variability in word sense, and led to several attempts at incorporating context, such as:
In the Chomskian tradition in linguistics there was no mechanism for the learning of semantic relations, and the nativist view considered all semantic notions as inborn. Thus, even novel concepts were proposed to have been dormant in some sense. This traditional view was also unable to address many issues such as metaphor or associative meanings, and semantic change, where meanings within a linguistic community change over time, and qualia or subjective experience. Another issue not addressed by the nativist model was how perceptual cues are combined in thought, e.g. in mental rotation.
This traditional view of semantics, as an innate finite meaning inherent in a lexical unit that can be composed to generate meanings for larger chunks of discourse, is now being fiercely debated in the emerging domain of cognitive linguisticsand also in the non-Fodorian camp in Philosophy of Language.The challenge is motivated by:
A concrete example of the latter phenomenon is semantic underspecification — meanings are not complete without some elements of context. To take an example of a single word, "red", its meaning in a phrase such as red book is similar to many other usages, and can be viewed as compositional. However, the colours implied in phrases such as "red wine", and "red hair", or "red soil", or "red skin" are very different. Indeed, these colours by themselves would not be called "red" by native speakers. These instances are contrastive, so "red wine" is so called only in comparison with the other kind of wine . This view goes back to de Saussure:
and may go back to earlier Indian views on language, especially the Nyaya view of words as indicators and not carriers of meaning.
An attempt to defend a system based on propositional meaning for semantic underspecification can be found in the Generative Lexicon model of James Pustejovsky, who extends contextual operations into the lexicon. Thus meanings are generated on the fly based on finite context.
Another set of concepts related to fuzziness in semantics is based onprototypes. The work of Eleanor Rosch and George Lakoffin the 1970s led to a view thatnatural categories are not characterizable in terms ofnecessary and sufficientconditions, but are graded and inconsistent as tothe status of their constituent members.
Systems of categories are not objectively "out there" in the world but arerooted in people's experience. These categories evolve as learned conceptsof the world — meaning is not an objective truth, but asubjective construct, learned from experience, and language arisesout of the "grounding of ourconceptual systems in shared embodiment and bodily experience".A corollary of this is that the conceptual categories will not be identical fordifferent cultures, or indeed, for every individual in the same culture. Thisleads to another debate .
English nouns are found by language analysis to have 25 different semantic features, each associated with its own pattern of fMRI brain activity. The individual contribution of each parameter predicts the fMRI pattern when nouns are considered thus supporting the view that nouns derive their meaning from prior experience linked to a common symbol.

In संगणक विज्ञान, where it is considered as an application of mathematical logic, semantics reflects the meaning of programs or functions.
In this regard, semantics permits programs to be separated into their syntactical part and their semantic part . For instance, the following statements use different syntaxes, but issue the same instructions:
Generally these operations would all perform an arithmetical addition of 'y' to 'x' and store the result in a variable called 'x'.
Semantics for computer applications falls into three categories:
The Semantic Web refers to the extension of the World Wide Web through the embedding of additional semantic metadata; s.a. Web Ontology Language .
In psychology, semantic memory is memory for meaning, in other words, the aspect of memory that preserves only the gist, the general significance, of remembered experience, while episodic memory is memory for the ephemeral details, the individual features, or the unique particulars of experience. Word meaning is measured by the company they keep; the relationships among words themselves in a semantic network. In a network created by people analyzing their understanding of the word the links and decomposition structures of the network are few in number and kind; and include "part of", "kind of", and similar links. In automated ontologies the links are computed vectors without explicit meaning. Various automated technologies are being developed to compute the meaning of words: latent semantic indexing and support vector machines as well as natural language processing, neural networks and predicate calculus techniques.
साचा:MultiCol
साचा:ColBreak
साचा:ColBreak
साचा:EndMultiCol
साचा:MultiCol
साचा:ColBreak
साचा:EndMultiCol
In international scientific vocabulary semantics is also called semasiology.The discipline of Semantics is distinct from Alfred Korzybski's General Semantics, which is a system for looking at the semantic reactions of the whole human organism in its environment to some event, symbolic or otherwise. || मराठी
The basic area of study is the meaning of signs, and the study of relations between different linguistic units: homonymy, synonymy, antonymy, polysemy, paronyms, hypernymy, hyponymy, meronymy, metonymy, holonymy, exocentricity / endocentricity, linguistic compounds. A key concern is how meaning attaches to larger chunks of text, possibly as a result of the composition from smaller units of meaning. || मराठी
would now indicate loves as the head, and its entry in the lexicon would point to the arguments as the agent, John, and the object, bagel, with a special role for the article "a" . This resulted in the sentence being associated with the logical predicate loves, thuslinking semantics to categorial grammar models of syntax.The logical predicate thus obtained would be elaborated further, e.g. using truth theory models, which ultimately relate meanings to a set of Tarskiian universals, which may lie outside the logic. The notion of such meaning atoms or primitives is basic to the language of thought hypothesis from the 70s. || मराठी
A concrete example of the latter phenomenon is semantic underspecification — meanings are not complete without some elements of context. To take an example of a single word, "red", its meaning in a phrase such as red book is similar to many other usages, and can be viewed as compositional.|| मराठी
prototypes. The work of Eleanor Rosch and George Lakoffin the 1970s led to a view thatnatural categories are not characterizable in terms ofnecessary and sufficientconditions, but are graded and inconsistent as tothe status of their constituent members. || मराठी
rooted in people's experience. These categories evolve as learned conceptsof the world — meaning is not an objective truth, but asubjective construct, learned from experience, and language arisesout of the "grounding of ourconceptual systems in shared embodiment and bodily experience".|| मराठी
 will not be identical fordifferent cultures, or indeed, for every individual in the same culture. Thisleads to another debate . || मराठी
Generally these operations would all perform an arithmetical addition of 'y' to 'x' and store the result in a variable called 'x'. || मराठी

साचा:Wiktionarypar
साचा:Philosophy of language
