
 


You can read in english at Helpdesk. मराठी विकिपीडियावर किमान स्वरूपाची सहाय्य पाने उपलब्ध असून सुद्धा, नवीन सदस्यांना व्यक्तिगत सहाय्य आणि जिव्हाळा ऊपयोगी आणि उत्साह देणारा वाटतो.
स्वागत आणि साहाय्य चमूत सहभागी होऊ इच्छिणार्‍या सदस्यांनी खालील पैकी साचा आपल्या सदस्य पानावर लावावा.
Welcome to the Mentoring Program
The Mentoring Program is designed to support new and inexperienced users, who are willing to contribute to this encyclopedia, by connecting them with experienced users assisting them during their first steps. If you need some guidance to get along, your personal contact, the mentor, will answer your questions, help to solve problems, and give advise on technical matters. To get in contact with a mentor, please carry out the following instructions:
If you would prefer being assisted by a particular mentor replace the automatically generated साचा:Mentor gesucht with the phrase साचा:Mentor gesucht. You can also visit the IRC-Chat on channel #wikipedia-de-mp provided by the mentoring program to get any further information or help needed.

I see some invalid edits. Marathi wikipedia is not the right place for certain things. May we make some Template:Invalid to mark such edits? 
Call to edit anything here created an idea bin. So far this process hundreds of edits. Step back and observe. What kind of edits are coming in? Who is editing? every user mistake, is a feedback system, and all user feedback is very valuable. Remember to be nice to newcomers. Show some empathy for newcomers. Be aware that newcomers will outnumber the number of active editors in perpetuity. Fresh editors know nothing. They aren't aware other projects exist, they aren't aware meta exists, they aren't aware the foundation exists, or chapters. They aren't aware how things are organized in neat processes and procedures on meta and other sister projects.
Let me recall a story of a janitor working in the basement of the Eiffel Tower, sweeping the floors. One day he complained to his chef. He told him hundreds of tourists every day ask him again where the bathrooms are. How is he supposed to do his job of sweeping the floors if he has to answer the same question over and over again? His boss replied calmly. You might have answered that question thousands of times, but for the tourist arriving here is is the first time she raises the question.
You might want to be nice to a newcomer and post a message or question on the user talk page of the proposer asking them if they have seen right way to the thing.
The ultimate question is how to increase newcomer awareness of existing projects, existing organizations, existing processes and existing procedures, side by side with increasing newcomer awareness of existing off-wiki communication channels like mailing lists 
Where do I put article requests?ThanksWhisperToMe २०:४७, ४ एप्रिल २०१२ प्रिय साथियो मेरा नाम आस मौहम्मद अब्बासी है और मेरा हिन्दी विकिपीडिया पे नाम आस मोहम्मद अब्बासी है।अत: उसमे जो यूजर आता है उसको हटाया जा सकता है या नही कृप्या मेरी मदद करें धन्यवाद 2405:205:200A:E05B:0:0:1382:80A4 ०८:२६, ३१ डिसेंबर २०१६ 
