


प्रणयातून होणाऱ्या सुखद संवेदनांमुळे पुरुषाचं शिश्न ताठ आणि स्त्रीच्या योनीमध्ये ओलावा निर्माण होतो. या दोन गोष्टी संभोग घडून येण्यासाठी अत्यंत गरजेच्या असतात. साधारणपणे किमान २५ ते ३० मिनिटं प्रणयात रमावे असे मानले जाते.
In human sexual behavior, foreplay is a set of intimate psychological and physical acts between two or more people meant to create and increase sexual arousal, in anticipation of sexual intercourse.
Any act that creates and enhances sexual stimulation between the sex partners may constitute foreplay, including kissing, touching, embracing, talking, and teasing . The manual or oral stimulation of erogenous zones may be considered foreplay, as well as being part of the sex act itself. Sexual role playing, fetish activities, and BDSM can also be considered foreplay, though they may also accompany intercourse and not just precede it. 
There are many historical references to foreplay, with many artistic depictions. The Ancient Indian work Kama Sutra mentions different types of embracing, kissing, and marking with nails and teeth. It also mentions BDSM activities such as slapping and moaning as "play."
साचा:Original research
If no intimate sexual acts are intended, foreplay-type actions are often classified as flirting, "fooling around" or, in colloquial terms, being "touchy-feely". Since these interactions are non-explicit, there can be misunderstandings about whether an invitation has been extended or accepted. Inadvertent or not, this kind of miscommunication is often termed "leading someone on."
A romantic, intimate, or overtly sexual atmosphere can be considered a gesture of foreplay. Foreplay can begin with non-physical behavior that signals sexual availability. Verbally, foreplay may include compliments, subtle comments with double entendre, and intimate conversations. Non-verbally, foreplay can include provocative clothing, preening gestures, winking, licking or biting one's lips, standing inside a partner's personal space, and holding a gaze longer than is acceptable for casual acquaintances. 
Foreplay eventually turns physical. Simple and possibly innocuous acts, such as straightening someone's clothing or hair, bumping into someone while walking, stroking someone's arm, or whispering in someone's ear can constitute foreplay. One may also hold hands, touch the face, kiss, "bite", tickle, or massage.
As comfort increases, so usually does the level of intimacy. More intimate examples include:
There are many types of foreplay. Stimulation with the hands is the most common form, followed by oral stimulation. Foreplay is to provide sexual pleasure and arousal. The act is generally the act of preparing one's partner for sexual intercourse, though it does not exclude the chance of orgasm if applied rigorously.
Direct manipulation of naked erogenous zones is almost always considered foreplay . In women, this includes stimulation of the clitoris and vulva. In men, it includes stimulation of the penis and scrotum. For both sexes, it could include stimulation of nipples and anus. Stimulation can be achieved by mouth, hands, sex toys like dildos or vibrators, or common household objects like feathers or ice cubes. Direct manipulation of naked erogenous zones is not considered foreplay when it is not preparatory for further sexual acts. For example, mutual masturbation and oral sex are often considered final sexual acts; as final acts with no expectation of further sexual congress, these are not considered foreplay.
Foreplay tends to become increasingly physical and intense as the couple moves closer to intercourse. It reaches its peak in the moments just before intercourse, when it induces a strong mutual desire for penetration. During the final stage of foreplay, genital teasing may take place for a brief time. Technically, foreplay ends with intromission, or the beginning of intercourse. In practical terms, however, the continuity between foreplay and intercourse may be very great, since the couple may continue to engage in foreplay-like behavior during intercourse.
Safe sex practices can be incorporated as part of foreplay. A condom or dental dam can be applied in an erotic or playful way as part of the final stages of foreplay. Alternately, couples may select a method of birth control in part because it does not interrupt the progression of foreplay into intercourse, such as the Pill, other forms of hormonal contraception, or the IUD.
Psychologically, foreplay lowers inhibitions and increases the emotional comfort of the partners. Physically, it stimulates the process that produces an erection in men, allowing them to penetrate an orifice. In women, it helps stimulate the process that leads to erection of the clitoris, raising of the cervix, and the production of vaginal lubrication, allowing penetration to take place comfortably and effectively. 
Foreplay can vary dramatically based on age, religion, and cultural norms. In spite of the clichéd modern folklore that women demand more foreplay and require more time to become physically aroused, recent scientific research refutes that myth. Scientists from McGill University Health Centre in Montreal, Canada used the method of thermal imaging to record baseline temperature change in the genital area as the definition of the time necessary for sexual arousal. Researchers studied the time required for an individual to reach the peak of sexual arousal and concluded that, on average, women and men spend almost the same time for sexual arousal — around 10 minutes. This, however, does not take into account the amount of time necessary to become mentally aroused.
साचा:Sex
