


"ईथे थुंकु नये थुंकल्यास कारवाई होइल" 
हा विभाग कालांतराने विक्शनरी प्रक्ल्पात स्थानांतरीतकरणे अपेक्षीत आहे.
Spitting or expectoration is the act of forcibly ejecting saliva or other substances from the mouth. It is usually considered rude and a social taboo in many parts of the world. It is possible to transmit infectious diseases in this way.
Spitting upon another person, especially onto the face, is a universal sign of anger, hatred or contempt. It can represent a "symbolical regurgitation" or an act of contamination. It can also be a device to bring good luck or ward off bad. 
The term spitting is also used to describe a type of soft rain, or the act of reciting premade lyrics by a rapper. This usage is colloquial and mainly used in the genres of rap, grime and hip hop.साचा:Fact
It may be preceded by hawking, forcing up phlegm from the upper respiratory tract, giving the ejected gob a more slimy consistency. 
Social attitudes towards spitting have changed greatly in Western Europe since the Middle Ages. Then, frequent spitting was part of everyday life, and at all levels of society, it was thought ill-mannered to suck back saliva to avoid spitting. By the early 1700s, spitting had become seen as something which should be concealed, and by 1859 many viewed the spitting on the floor or street as vulgar, especially in mixed company. Spittoons were used openly during the nineteenth century to provide an acceptable outlet for spitters. Spittoons became far less common after the influenza epidemic of 1918, and their use has since virtually disappeared, though each justice of the Supreme Court of the United States continues to be provided with a personal cuspidor.
Atypical pneumonia can be spread by respiratory droplets. Atypical pneumonia is a pneumonia that does not respond to the usual antibiotic treatment, therefore making this pneumonia rather severe. Another disease which can be transmitted by spitting is tuberculosis.
दूषित लाळेमधील विषाणूमार्फत अयोग्य जागी थुंकल्यामुळे लोकांमध्ये विविध संसर्गजन्य आजार पसरू शकतात जसे गालगूंड, विषमज्वर, स्वाईन फ्ल्यू,क्षयरोग,मेंदूज्वर . जर व्यक्तीला फुफ्फुसांचा क्षयरोग झाला असेल, आणि बाधित थुंकी-लाळ त्याच्या तोंडावाटे बाहेर पडत असेल, तर जंतुच्या संसर्गाची शक्यता खूपच अधिक असते.
There are some places whereby spitting is a competitive sport, with or without a projectile in the mouth. For example, there is a Guinness World Record for cherry pit spitting, and there are world championships in Kudu dung spitting.
साचा:Trivia

